Title: LLVM Translation Validation Automated with Large Language Models and Lean

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.19583v1

Published Time: Fri, 18 Sep 2026 00:29:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# LLVM Translation Validation Automated with Large Language Models and Lean 

## Chunhao Liao 

University of Waterloo Canada 

chunhao.liao@uwaterloo.ca 

## Hongxu Xu 

University of Waterloo Canada 

hongxu.xu@uwaterloo.ca 

## Xintong Zhou 

University of Waterloo Canada 

x27zhou@uwaterloo.ca 

## Yizhou Zhang 

University of Waterloo Canada 

yizhou@uwaterloo.ca 

## Chengnian Sun 

University of Waterloo Canada 

cnsun@uwaterloo.ca 

## Abstract 

LLVM is the cornerstone of modern compilers, but its subtle intermediate representation (IR) semantics make transforma-tions error-prone and necessitate formal verification. Alive2, a state-of-the-art translation validator based on satisfiabil-ity modulo theories, has achieved substantial success in au-tomating the validation of LLVM transformations. However, it still faces scalability limitations, does not support symbolic bitwidths, and offers only bounded guarantees for loops. In contrast, interactive theorem provers such as Lean can ad-dress these cases but require substantial proof engineering. In this paper, we present Trivet , a framework combin-ing large language models (LLMs) and Lean for automated translation validation of LLVM transformations. Trivet gen-erates structured proof scaffolds based on source and target functions, automatically discharges obligations amenable to deterministic reasoning, and delegates transformation-specific obligations to LLMs. It produces refinement proofs or counterexample-based refutations, with every successful verdict checked by the Lean kernel. On 148 LLVM trans-formations, Trivet verifies or refutes 147, leaving one in-valid case unresolved. Successful cases include 60 loop-free transformations with symbolic bitwidths, 27 cases from a restricted class of loop-containing transformations, and 10 complex valid fixed-bitwidth cases on which Alive2 times out. Compared with an unscaffolded baseline, scaffolding enables 26 additional proofs. On cases solved by both con-figurations, it reduces mean proof time by 75.9% and mean monetary cost by 88%. 

Keywords: Compilers, Translation Validation, Large Lan-guage Models, Formal Verification 

## 1 Introduction 

The LLVM compiler infrastructure [16] is a cornerstone of modern software development in industry and academia. At its core is the LLVM Intermediate Representation (IR), a strongly typed language that bridges high-level source lan-guages and diverse target architectures. To enable aggressive optimization, the IR provides highly expressive semantics, including Undefined Behavior (UB) [25]. This expressiveness comes at a cost: combined with the sophisticated reason-ing required by optimization passes, it makes correct imple-mentation notoriously difficult—developers must account for every edge case by hand, and a single overlooked one can silently produce a miscompilation. Indeed, optimization passes account for a significant portion of reported bugs in LLVM [17, 51, 60], making reliable optimizer development a persistent challenge. 

Translation Validation. To provide formal guarantees that compiler transformations preserve program semantics, modern compiler development increasingly relies on trans-lation validation [44, 49]. This technique compares a source function (pre-transformation program) with its correspond-ing target function (post-transformation program) using a formal semantic model, ultimately either proving that the target refines the source (see theorem 2.1) or generating a counterexample if the transformation is invalid. A prominent instance of this methodology is Alive2 [38], a state-of-the-art, SMT-based [3] bounded translation validator specifically designed for LLVM IR. Alive2 has been widely adopted by the LLVM community to rigorously vet compiler transfor-mations before they are accepted [24]. Despite its practical effectiveness, Alive2 has three inher-ent limitations: 1. Solver Scalability. As an SMT-based tool, Alive2 can time out on large bitwidths, long instruction sequences, and complex formulas [45]. 2. Fixed-Bitwidth Reasoning. Alive2 only supports valida-tion of fixed-bitwidth transformation instances, limiting its ability to verify optimizations that hold across sym-bolic bitwidths [21, 43]. 3. Bounded Loop Unrolling. Alive2 validates loops by unrolling them up to a fixed bound, leaving subsequent iterations unchecked. These limitations motivate a complementary approach to formally validating LLVM transformations. arXiv:2609.19583v1 [cs.PL] 17 Sep 2026 Chunhao Liao, Hongxu Xu, Xintong Zhou, Yizhou Zhang, and Chengnian Sun 

Interactive theorem provers (ITPs) offer a promising alter-native for translation validation. Compared to SMT-based bounded translation validation, an ITP can efficiently express and validate transformations involving symbolic bitwidths, large bitwidths, long instruction sequences, and loops. While these benefits are compelling in principle, the practical adop-tion of such provers has historically been hindered by the prohibitive cost of proof engineering, which often requires an order of magnitude more proof code than implementation code [8, 9, 18]. However, recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) make ITP-based workflows increasingly vi-able. LLMs can iteratively synthesize and repair proof scripts, while the ITP kernel rigorously guarantees the correctness of the final proof [40, 53, 55]. 

Trivet . To this end, this paper presents Trivet 1, a frame-work that pioneers the application of LLMs and Lean [10, 11] to the automated translation validation of LLVM transforma-tions. By leveraging domain knowledge of compiler optimiza-tions, Trivet automatically extracts a Lean refinement theo-rem and structured proof scaffolds directly from the source and target functions. These scaffolds not only minimize ex-pensive LLM queries, but also systematically guide the LLM through both verification and refutation. For verification, the scaffold leaves focused typed holes for transformation-specific proof obligations, which an LLM can solve, using Lean’s diagnostic feedback to iteratively repair proofs when necessary. For refutation, a structured prompt guides the LLM to propose a concrete counterexample. Trivet uses a deterministic scaffold to check the candidate counterexam-ple and, upon successful validation, construct a machine-checked proof of non-refinement. In both cases, Lean re-mains the trusted checker of the final verdict. We evaluate Trivet on a dataset of 148 LLVM transforma-tions. The dataset includes a loop-free subset (60 valid, 60 invalid) and a loop-containing subset (14 valid, 14 invalid). Both subsets cover fixed-bitwidth and symbolic-bitwidth cases. Overall, Trivet successfully validates all 74 valid trans-formations and refutes 73 invalid ones, leaving only one in-valid transformation unresolved. Moreover, compared to an unscaffolded baseline, scaffolding reduces mean proof time by 75.9% and mean monetary cost by 88%, while enabling 26 additional proofs in total. In contrast, Alive2 validates 20 out of 30 loop-free, fixed-bitwidth LLVM transformations, but cannot validate symbolic-bitwidth cases or provide un-bounded guarantees for loop-containing transformations. These results demonstrate Trivet ’s effectiveness in automat-ing the translation validation of LLVM transformations. 

Contributions. Our main contributions are listed below. 

• We introduce Trivet , the first framework applying LLMs and Lean to the automated translation validation of LLVM transformations: the LLM synthesizes refinement proofs  

> 1Trivet vets LLVM transformations based on the integration of three com-ponents: Lean, LLMs, and LLVM.

or counterexamples, while the Lean kernel rigorously cer-tifies every verdict. 

• We develop an automated, non-LLM generator that ex-tracts a Lean refinement theorem and structured proof scaffolds from the source and target functions. These scaf-folds encode compiler domain knowledge to guide the LLM, reducing validation to focused, transformation-specific holes and converting LLM-proposed counterexamples into machine-checked proofs. 

• We evaluate Trivet on 148 LLVM transformations, success-fully validating all 74 valid cases and refuting 73 invalid ones, leaving only one invalid transformation unresolved. 

Trivet validates symbolic-bitwidth and loop-containing transformations beyond Alive2’s scope. Scaffolding re-duces mean proof time by 75.9% and mean monetary cost by 88% compared to an unscaffolded baseline, enabling 26 additional proofs in total. 

## 2 Background 

This section provides necessary background on LLVM trans-formations and LLVM translation validation. 

2.1 LLVM Transformations 

LLVM transformations rewrite LLVM IR while preserving the program’s observable behavior. They range from local instruction-level rewrites to optimizations involving mul-tiple basic blocks or loops. Following prior work [43], we represent a transformation by the following judgment: 

PRE ⊨ LHS ⇒ RHS 

where LHS (left-hand side) denotes the pre-transformation fragment, RHS (right-hand side) denotes its replacement, and PRE is a logical predicate over the operands in LHS that defines when the transformation is valid. Specifically, this judgment states that replacing LHS with RHS is semantics-preserving when PRE holds. When no explicit precondition is specified, PRE defaults to true , indicating that the trans-formation is always valid and imposing no constraints on the operands. In practice, LLVM IR translation validation instantiates this judgment as a pair of LLVM functions [24]: a src func-tion, which encodes PRE and LHS , and a tgt function, which encodes RHS . The PRE is expressed within the src function through the llvm.assume intrinsic, which restricts the in-puts to those satisfying PRE [28]. 

Undefined Behavior Semantics. LLVM has two forms of Undefined Behavior (UB): immediate UB and deferred UB [25]. Immediate UB, such as division by zero, permits arbitrary program behavior. Deferred UB, such as integer overflow, in-stead produces an ill-defined value that propagates through downstream computations. These ill-defined values take two LLVM Translation Validation Automated with Large Language Models and Lean 

forms in LLVM: poison [29] and undef [32]. Our work sup-ports poison , which taints dependent computations and trig-gers immediate UB when used in a way that requires a well-defined value, such as a branch condition. In contrast, an 

undef value nondeterministically takes any value of its type at each use, which has long complicated reasoning about LLVM semantics. LLVM has deprecated undef [37], and thus our work does not support it. 

Refinement Relation. Since optimizers routinely exploit UB, correctness cannot be formulated as equivalence. Follow-ing Alive2 [26, 38], we formalize transformation correctness in terms of refinement. 

Definition 2.1 (Refinement) . A target function tgt refines asource function src , denoted src ⊒ tgt , if for every input: 

• if src triggers immediate UB, tgt may exhibit any behav-ior [27]; 

• if src returns poison, tgt may return poison or any other value, but must not trigger immediate UB [29]; 

• if src returns a well-defined value, tgt must return the same value and must not trigger immediate UB [33]. In the absence of UB, this relation degenerates to equivalence. 

2.2 LLVM Translation Validation 

Translation validation checks each transformation result independently. Given source and target functions src and 

tgt , the validator determines whether src ⊒ tgt . A successful check verifies the transformation; otherwise, it reports a counterexample showing that tgt does not refine src .

2.2.1 Bounded SMT-Based Translation Validation. 

Bounded SMT-based translation validation encodes the se-mantics of the source and target functions as logical con-straints over bounded domains, such as bit-vectors with fixed-bitwidth and finitely unrolled loops. An SMT solver then searches for an input on which tgt does not refine src ; if no such input exists, the transformation is verified within the encoded bounds [20, 38]. Alive2, the state-of-the-art LLVM translation validator [24, 38], follows this approach. 

Inherent Limitations of Alive2. Despite its widespread adoption in the LLVM community, Alive2 inherits fundamen-tal limitations from its underlying bounded SMT-based de-sign, particularly concerning solver scalability, fixed-bitwidth reasoning, and bounded loop unrolling. 

Limitation: Solver Scalability. Alive2 suffers from scala-bility bottlenecks due to its whole-function formulation of refinement checking and its reliance on bit-blasting in the un-derlying SMT solver. It encodes complete source and target functions without decomposition, causing solver complexity to grow rapidly with instruction count and bitwidth [45]. Furthermore, bit-blasting lowers fixed-width arithmetic to Boolean circuits, which can become particularly expensive for transformations involving nonlinear bit-vector opera-tions ( e.g. bvudiv ) or generalized rewrites [21, 43]. 

Limitation: Fixed-Bitwidth Reasoning. Since standard SMT bit-vector logics, such as the quantifier-free logic over fixed-size bit-vectors (QF_BV), reason about fixed bitwidths [2], Alive2 [38] cannot validate transformations over symbolic bitwidths. Prior work therefore commonly bounds valida-tion to selected bitwidths ( e.g. 64 bits) [39, 43]. Consequently, validation at selected bitwidths leaves every other width un-verified. Moreover, transformations with multiple bitwidths require validating each width combination separately, sub-stantially increasing the validation overhead. 

Limitation: Bounded Loop Unrolling. Alive2 handles trans-formations involving loops by unrolling them to a fixed depth [38]. Choosing this depth poses a dilemma: shallow unrolling misses bugs that manifest only at later iterations, while deeper bounds make the generated queries intractable. Consequently, bounded loop validation guarantees correct-ness only within the selected bound, leaving subsequent iterations unchecked. 

2.2.2 ITP-Based Translation Validation. Interactive the-orem provers (ITPs) such as Rocq [52] and Lean [10, 11] provide a rigorous alternative to SMT-based translation vali-dation. In an ITP, the semantics of the compiler IR and the tar-get refinement relation are formalized in higher-order logic, with correctness proofs mechanically verified by a small, trusted kernel. For example, Vellvm [5, 62, 64, 65] formalizes LLVM IR semantics in Rocq, while Lean-MLIR [6] provides a Lean framework to validate transformations across multiple MLIR dialects, including LLVM. While ITP-based validation naturally handles symbolic bitwidths and unbounded loops, it fundamentally relies on manual proof construction—a labor-intensive process requir-ing specialized formal methods expertise. Recent advances in applying Large Language Models (LLMs) to automated theorem proving offer a viable path to mitigate this burden. In this work, we combine the foundational correctness guar-antees of ITPs with the automation of LLMs to synthesize formal proofs for LLVM transformations. 

## 3 Methodology 

This section presents the design of Trivet , a framework that integrates an LLM with Lean to automate translation valida-tion for LLVM transformations. Figure 1 shows Trivet ’s workflow. For each transformation, 

Trivet launches two branches in parallel , each producing a proof for the Lean kernel to check: 

• Refinement branch. Trivet first emits a refinement scaf-fold that discharges routine obligations and leaves typed holes for the transformation-specific proof obligations; the LLM later fills the holes. Chunhao Liao, Hongxu Xu, Xintong Zhou, Yizhou Zhang, and Chengnian Sun Stop Cx Branch Refutation Scaffold LLM Proposes Cx Candidate LLM Proof Generation 

> Lean Proof Checker
> Cx Proof Generation Refinement Proof Generation
> src, tgt
> Refinement Scaffold
> Fail
> Refutation Success Refinement Success
> Stop Refinement Branch Propose Diagnostics & Repair

Figure 1. The workflow of Trivet . Cx denotes counterexam-ple. 

• Counterexample branch. The LLM first proposes a coun-terexample candidate; Trivet then emits a refutation scaf-fold that turns the candidate into a complete Lean proof of non-refinement. Lean checks each proof, with its diagnostics guiding the LLM to revise the refinement proof or propose a new counterex-ample. Each branch repeats generation and checking until a proof is accepted or the time budget expires. The first ac-cepted proof establishes validity or invalidity; Trivet stops the other branch and reports the result. If neither succeeds, 

Trivet leaves the transformation unresolved. This section is organized as follows. §§ 3.1 and 3.2 present the refinement and counterexample branches for loop-free, single-block transformations. § 3.3 extends these workflows to a restricted class of loop-containing transformations. § 3.4 describes the implementation and limitations. 

3.1 Refinement Proof Generation 

Generating complete refinement proofs with an LLM is costly, particularly across diverse UB cases. To address this, we design a scaffold construction strategy that delegates only transformation-specific reasoning to the LLM: it decomposes the refinement goal ( src ⊒ tgt ) via UB-triggering condi-tions, automatically discharges deterministic obligations, and leaves only typed proof holes for the LLM to complete. To guide scaffold construction, we examine Lean-MLIR’s LLVM dialect [6] and identify nine cases in which an operator or instruction flag may produce UB. We call such operators and flags UB-sensitive constructs and associate each with its precise UB-triggering circumstance , the condition under which each construct triggers UB, such as signed overflow for nsw or a zero divisor for udiv .

Trivet constructs the scaffold by splitting cases on these conditions and automatically discharging proof obligations whenever the source yields UB. For well-defined source cases, 

Trivet generates typed proof holes—establishing value equiv-alence and absence of target UB—to be completed by the LLM under the corresponding branch hypotheses. To guarantee soundness, Trivet ensures that the generated proof passes Lean kernel type-checking without open goals, strictly pre-serves the original definitions and theorem statement, and relies exclusively on standard axioms [54]. 

3.1.1 Illustrative Example. Figure 2 illustrates refine-ment proof generation for a real-world LLVM transforma-tion [23]. Let 𝑤 be a positive bitwidth, and 𝑎 and 𝑏 be 𝑤 -bit inputs. The transformation is: 

(𝑦 <s 0) = (𝑇 <s 0) ⊨ 𝑦 <u 𝑇 

| {z }  

> src (𝑤 )

=⇒ 𝑎 +nuw 𝑏 <u 1

| {z } 

> tgt (𝑤 )

,

where 𝑇 = 𝑤 × 𝑤, 𝑦 = (𝑏 +nuw (𝑇 − 1)) + nuw 𝑎. 

Here, all arithmetic uses 𝑤 -bit values. Multiplication and subtraction wrap modulo 2 𝑤 , while nuw additions produce poison on unsigned overflow. The operators <s and <u de-note signed and unsigned comparisons, respectively. src (𝑤 )

and tgt (𝑤 ) denote the source and target functions instan-tiated with input bitwidth 𝑤 . The refinement goal for the functions src and tgt is: 

∀𝑤 ∈ N, 𝑤 > 0 : src (𝑤 ) ⊒ tgt (𝑤 ).

As shown in Figure 2 (i), Trivet identifies five UB-sensitive constructs: poison inputs (C1), unsigned overflow in two source additions (C2, C3), an assumption violation (C4), and unsigned overflow in the target addition (C5). While C1–C4 stem from the source, C5 is target-specific. Because C5 could cause the target to evaluate to poison for a well-defined source execution (violating refinement), it must be proven unreachable and cannot be discharged automatically. In Figure 2 (ii), Trivet performs case analysis on C1–C4 to cover all source outcomes. If any of C1–C3 holds, the source evaluates to poison, and a pre-existing lemma discharges the obligation since the target produces no immediate UB. If C4 holds, the source triggers immediate UB, vacuously satisfying refinement. Otherwise, the source is well-defined. Trivet then gener-ates two proof holes: a value equivalence hole (𝑦 <u 𝑇 ) =

(𝑧 <u 1), and a target-UB hole ensuring that 𝑎 + 𝑏 does not overflow (C5). In Figure 2 (iii), the LLM fills these two holes under the accumulated branch hypotheses (which rule out C1–C4). Finally, the Lean kernel type-checks the assembled proof within the scaffold. 

3.1.2 Proof Scaffold Generation. Trivet first identifies UB-sensitive constructs across both functions and systemati-cally splits on three categories: 1 the source’s UB-triggering circumstances, ordered by when values are first demanded; 

2 target-specific circumstances that can trigger immediate UB; and 3 value-selection conditions (e.g., in select instruc-tions [31]), which guides the LLM to prove each branch sep-arately. These splits produce proof obligations under distinct branch hypotheses, such that the original refinement goal holds if and only if all resulting obligations are discharged. Each obligation is handled according to the source out-come. For immediate UB, Trivet automatically discharges LLVM Translation Validation Automated with Large Language Models and Lean Transformation        

> src :
> Inputs a: w, b: w bw: w = constant w T: w = mul bw, bw T1: w = sub T, 1 x: w = add nuw b, T1 y: w = add nuw x, a Sign: i1 = (y < s0)==(T < s0) assume Sign return y < uT
> tgt :
> Inputs a: w, b: w z: w = add nuw a,b return z < u1

Goal: 

∀ w

∈ ℕ , w > 0: src(w) 

⊒ tgt(w) 

(i) UB-Sensitive Constructs Identification               

> ID Construct UB-triggering Circumstances Target-specific? C2 add nuw b, T1 Unsigned Overflow ✗
> C3 add nuw x, a Unsigned Overflow ✗
> C4 assume Sign Assumption Failure ✗
> C1 a,b Poison inputs ✗

(ii) Refinement Scaffold Generation                    

> Split on UB-Sensitive Constructs Case Decomposition
> Discharge UB branches Discharge UB branches with deterministic rules
> Insert Proof Holes
> Insert value and target-specific UB holes for the LLM.
> 12231
> Goal C1 ¬C1 C2 ¬C2
> ¬C3 ¬C4 C3 C4
> 3111222
> 3Insert Proof Holes in :
> Refinement Scaffold
> C5 add nuw a,b Unsigned Overflow ✓
> (a) (y < uT)==(z < u1) (b) C5: target-specific UB
> -- Comments: Let T = w ×w, S = (b + (T − 1)) + a theorem value_hole (a b : w) (h 0h₁ h₂ hs ) : (S < ᵤT) = (a + b < ᵤ1) := by ... -- Invoke the LLM to finish this proof theorem target_ub_hole (a b : w) (h 0h₁ h₂ hs ) : noUOverflow (a + b) := by ... -- Invoke the LLM to finish this proof theorem example (w : Nat) (w > 0): src w ⊒tgt w := by ... -- Case Decomposition · cases h 0: no_poison_input · cases h₁ : nuw1 · cases h₂ : nuw2 · cases hs : Sign -- Insert Proof Holes: · have hval := value_hole a b h 0h₁ h₂ hs have hsafe := target_ub_hole a b h 0h₁ h₂ hs simp_all ... -- Discharge UB branches automatically

(iii) Complete Refinement Proof 

Lean Proof Check Axiom Audit 

Figure 2. An illustrative example of refinement proof generation in Trivet .the obligation because any target behavior is permitted [26]. For poison, it discharges the obligation once target imme-diate UB is ruled out, as the target may yield either poison or a well-defined value [30]. For a well-defined value, Trivet 

leaves one hole for value equality and separate holes to rule out each target-specific UB-triggering circumstance. Finally, 

Trivet validates the scaffold’s syntactic and type correctness using Lean. 

3.1.3 LLM-Driven Proof Completion. Trivet asks the LLM to fill the remaining typed holes with proofs of value equivalence and the absence of target-specific UB. A candi-date proof is accepted when it satisfies the following condi-tions: 1. the completed proof passes kernel checking; 2. the proof contains neither sorry nor admit ;3. the proof depends exclusively on the standard axioms [54]; and 4. the source and target definitions and the theorem state-ment remain unchanged. 

Prompt Design. The prompt template comprises three core elements. 

• System and Task. The prompt assigns the LLM the role of a Lean theorem prover and identifies the target proof file. It instructs the LLM to finish the proof by replacing the sorry placeholders with valid proofs. 

• Instructions. The prompt instructs the LLM to inspect proof goals and retrieve diagnostics. The prompt also spec-ifies that the LLM may add auxiliary lemmas and raise re-source limits, such as maxHeartbeats and maxRecDepth ,when necessary. 

• Hard Rules. To preserve proof integrity, the prompt ex-plicitly forbids changes to the refinement theorem state-ment or the source and target definitions. 

3.2 Counterexample Proof Generation 

The counterexample branch refutes invalid transformations by turning a candidate counterexample into a proof of non-refinement. Because refinement quantifies universally over all admissible bitwidths and inputs, a single counterexample suffices to disprove it. The LLM is restricted solely to propos-ing a candidate counterexample with concrete bitwidths and input values, after which a deterministic scaffold constructs the complete Lean proof. Because this scaffold introduces no additional axiomatic dependencies, we omit the axiom audit from § 3.1.3. The proof is accepted once it passes Lean kernel type-checking. 

3.2.1 Illustrative Example. Figure 3 illustrates the coun-terexample proof generation in Trivet using an incorrect generalization of a real-world LLVM transformation [22, 43]. This transformation involves two symbolic bitwidths satis-fying 0 < 𝑤 1 < 𝑤 2, where inputs 𝑥 and 𝐶 2 are of width 𝑤 1,whereas 𝐶 1 is of width 𝑤 2:

𝐶 2 = 𝑤 1 − 1 ⊨ (0 − zext (𝑥 ≫u 𝐶 2)) & (𝐶 1 − sext (𝑥 )) 

| {z }

src (𝑤 1,𝑤 2 )

=⇒  𝑥 <s (1 ≪ ( 𝐶 2 + 1))  ? (𝐶 1 − sext (𝑥 )) : 0 

| {z }

tgt (𝑤 1,𝑤 2 )

.

The source constructs a mask from the sign bit of 𝑥 , whereas the target replaces this mask with a signed comparison and a conditional selection. The counterexample goal is to establish that there exist admissible bitwidths for which the source is Chunhao Liao, Hongxu Xu, Xintong Zhou, Yizhou Zhang, and Chengnian Sun Transformation   

> src :
> Inputs x: w1, C1: w2, C2: w1 bw1: w1 = constant w1 w_minus_1: w1 = sub bw1, 1 same: i1 = (C2 == w_minus_1) assume same xLshr: w1 = lshr x, C2 negMask: w2 = sub 0, zext(xLshr) sub: w2 = sub C1, sext(x) result: w2 = and negMask, sub return result
> tgt :
> Inputs x: w1, C1: w2, C2: w1 sub: w2 = sub C1, sext(x) threshold: w1 = shl 1, (C2 + 1) cond: i1 = (x < sthreshold) result: w2 = select cond, sub, 0 return result

Goal: 

∃ w1 w2: 

ℕ , (w1 < w2) 

∧ (w1 > 0): ¬(src(w1, w2) 

⊒ tgt(w1, w2)) 

(i) LLM-based Cx Proposal (ii) Scaffold-based Cx Proof        

> -- Set up Comparison Rules local instance : Decidable (a ⊒b) := … -- Certify the Cx theorem verify_cx : ¬ (src 2 3 ⊒tgt 2 3) := by -- To prove ¬P, assume P and derive False. intro h -- Instantiate h with the Cx input. have hyp := h cxInput -- Move the instantiated hypothesis -- back into the goal. revert hyp -- Evaluates both programs and refutes it decide -- Refute Refinement theorem refute_refinement :
> ∃(w1 w2 : Nat) (h : w1 < w2) (h1 : 0 < w1), ¬ (src w1 w2 ⊒tgt w1 w2) := ⟨2, 3, by decide, by decide, verify_cx⟩

(iii) Complete Cx Proof 

Lean Proof Check 

Set up Comparison Rules  

> Deciding refinement between different outcomes (well-defined value / poison / immediate UB)
> 21

Comparison Rules    

> Per-case decision for ⊒;Decidable (a ⊒b)

Certify the Cx 

> Assume refinement, instantiate it at the Cx input, and let the kernel check it.
> 1

*Cx: Counterexample   

> Counterexample Value x=1, C1=0, C2=1 Counterexample Width w1=2, w2=3

Refute Refinement 3 

> Apply the certified Cx to refute the refinement.
> 2

Certify the Cx        

> Assumption:
> src (w1=2, w2=3) ⊒
> tgt (w1=2, w2=3) At input: x=1, C1=0, C2=1 Kernel check: Does 0 ⊒poison hold? No
> 3Refute Refinement
> Cx width: w1=2, w2=3 Condition: w1 < w2 ✓w1 > 0 ✓

Figure 3. An illustrative example of counterexample proof generation in Trivet .not refined by the target: 

∃𝑤 1, 𝑤 2 ∈ N, 0 < 𝑤 1 < 𝑤 2 : ¬ src (𝑤 1, 𝑤 2) ⊒ tgt (𝑤 1, 𝑤 2)

The counterexample proof process comprises three stages. First, the LLM proposes a candidate with bitwidths 𝑤 1 = 2and 𝑤 2 = 3 and input values 𝑥 = 1, 𝐶 1 = 0, and 𝐶 2 = 1, as shown in Figure 3 (i). Second, the scaffold constructs a formal proof of non-refinement from this candidate (Figure 3 (ii)). To enable proof by computation, the scaffold provides a com-putable Decidable instance for 𝑎 ⊒ 𝑏 , covering well-defined values, poison, and immediate UB. This instance allows the Lean kernel to check that the concrete source and target outcomes violate refinement, thereby certifying the coun-terexample. To establish the contradiction, the scaffold as-sumes src (2, 3) ⊒ tgt (2, 3), specializes this assumption to the proposed counterexample inputs, and invokes kernel eval-uation. The source evaluates to a well-defined 0, whereas the target evaluates to poison under LLVM semantics [29] because shl 1, 2 shifts a two-bit value by its bitwidth. The kernel therefore refutes 0 ⊒ poison . Together with proofs of the instantiated width constraints 𝑤 1 < 𝑤 2 (i.e. , 2 < 3) and 0 < 𝑤 1 (i.e. , 0 < 2), this fixed-width contradiction refutes the refinement theorem. Finally, Trivet accepts the proof once it passes Lean kernel type-checking. 

3.2.2 LLM-Driven Counterexample Proposal. Trivet 

asks the LLM to propose a candidate counterexample with concrete bitwidths and input values. If Trivet fails to refute the refinement theorem using the candidate, it appends the Lean diagnostics to the prompt and asks the LLM to generate a new candidate. This process repeats until Lean verifies a proof of non-refinement or five attempts have been made. 

Prompt Design. The prompt template follows the same structure as the refinement prompt in § 3.1.3. 

• System and Task. The prompt assigns the LLM the role of a counterexample generator. It asks the LLM to find a counterexample that violates the refinement claim. 

• Instructions. The prompt instructs the LLM to propose a counterexample by assigning concrete values to the sym-bolic bitwidths and inputs. If a candidate cannot be certi-fied, the next prompt includes the Lean diagnostics and asks the LLM to propose a new counterexample candidate. 

• Hard Rules. The LLM must save one candidate to the designated file as JSON, with complete bitwidths and 

inputs objects and no extra text. Before returning, it must check all constraints and confirm that the instantiated target function does not refine its source function. 

3.2.3 Scaffold-Based Proof Construction. Given a can-didate counterexample proposed by the LLM, Trivet deter-ministically synthesizes a proof of non-refinement in two steps: 

Contradiction via Decidable Evaluation. The scaffold assumes the claimed refinement theorem for contradiction and specializes it with the proposed bitwidths and input val-ues. To evaluate the resulting concrete proposition, Trivet 

leverages a Decidable instance of the refinement relation (𝑎 ⊒ 𝑏 ) that formalizes comparisons across well-defined val-ues, poison, and immediate UB. Kernel evaluation reduces the source and target expressions to concrete semantic outcomes; because these outcomes violate refinement ( e.g. , deriving LLVM Translation Validation Automated with Large Language Models and Lean 

0 ⊒ poison ), the decision procedure reduces the proposition to False .

Precondition Discharge and Verification. The scaffold then discharges the concrete bitwidth constraints ( e.g. , 0 <

𝑤 1 < 𝑤 2) via computation, assembling the counterexample and the contradiction into a complete proof of the negated refinement theorem. The final proof contains no remaining holes and is validated by Lean kernel type-checking. 

3.3 Loop-Containing Transformations 

For loop-free transformations, refinement can be established by directly comparing the source and target behaviors for all possible inputs. For transformations involving loops, how-ever, the proof must also account for all feasible loop iteration counts, since a loop may execute an arbitrary number of it-erations depending on the inputs. To address this challenge, Alive2 applies bounded loop unrolling, checking refinement only up to a selected unrolling bound and thereby potentially missing counterexamples that require more iterations [38]. By contrast, Trivet establishes refinement by induction, yield-ing a single correctness proof that covers all feasible loop iteration counts without relying on a fixed unrolling bound. In this paper, Trivet provides preliminary support for a restricted class of loop-containing transformations, from a source function containing LLVM’s canonical loop form [35, 36] to a loop-free target function with a single basic block. Specifically, the source function consists of three blocks: an entry preheader, a single self-looping body block with one back edge, and a dedicated exit block that returns imme-diately. This fixed topology enables Trivet to reuse a fixed proof scaffold and is grounded in practice: canonical loop form is enforced before the loop-pass execution, and the single-block, single-back-edge form is targeted by several loop idiom recognizers [34, 35]. For general loop-containing transformations, however, the proof scaffold varies with the source function’s control-flow graph (CFG). This variation arises because inductive proofs require every cycle in the CFG to pass through an invariant-bearing cutpoint [12], resulting in CFG-specific invariants and induction obligations. Accordingly, we leave support for general loop structures to future work. 

3.3.1 Loop-Aware Refinement Scaffold and Proof Gen-eration. Following the loop-free workflow in § 3.1, Trivet 

first constructs a loop-aware scaffold by extending the loop-free scaffold in § 3.1.2 to loop-containing transformations and then invokes the LLM to fill the proof holes and complete the proof. For loop-containing transformations, Trivet reuses the loop-free scaffold’s case decomposition, refinement rules, and target-specific UB holes. In the source entry block, it splits cases and automatically applies the refinement rules to discharge obligations for poison and immediate UB outcomes. For the target function, Trivet generates target-specific UB src :

> Inputs n, a, b: i64 Entry: p: i64 = mul nuw a, b pnz: i1 = icmp ne p, 0 assume pnz x: i64 = udiv n, a br Loop(x, 0) Loop(x: i64, q: i64): x1: i64 = sub x, b q1: i64 = add q, 1 small: i1 = icmp ult x, b cond_br small, Out(q), Loop(x1, q1) Out(result: i64): return result
> tgt :
> Inputs n, a, b: i64 Entry: p: i64 = mul nuw a, b res: i64 = udiv n, p return res
> Loop elimination by quotient composition

Figure 4. An illustrative example for a loop-containing trans-formation holes to rule out UB in the target when the source returns a well-defined value. For well-defined source outcomes, Trivet ’s loop-free scaffold uses a single value hole requiring the source and target functions to return the same value. In contrast, for transformations involving loops, Trivet replaces this single hole with loop-specific holes that jointly specify the proof obligations for refinement over an arbitrary num-ber of iterations. Table 1 provides an overview of the general and loop-specific holes in the refinement scaffold. Finally, 

Trivet invokes the LLM to provide the loop invariant and fill the proof holes in the scaffold and checks the completed proof following the same procedure in § 3.1.3. 

Illustrative Example. Figure 4 shows an illustrative loop-containing transformation that replaces a quotient computa-tion by repeated subtraction with an unsigned division. The source loop implements Euclidean division [7]: for 𝑥, 𝑏 ∈ N

with 𝑏 > 0, the unique quotient–remainder pair (𝑞, 𝑟 ) satis-fies 𝑥 = 𝑞 · 𝑏 + 𝑟 and 0 ≤ 𝑟 < 𝑏 , where 𝑞 = ⌊𝑥 /𝑏 ⌋ counts the subtractions. Starting from x = udiv n, a and 𝑞 = 0, the source repeatedly updates (𝑥, 𝑞 ) to (𝑥 − 𝑏, 𝑞 + 1) while 𝑥 ≥ 𝑏 

and then returns 𝑞 . It thus computes ⌊⌊ 𝑛 /𝑎 ⌋/ 𝑏 ⌋ = ⌊𝑛 /( 𝑎 ·𝑏 )⌋ ,which the target computes directly using udiv n, p , where 

𝑝 = 𝑎 · 𝑏 .

Refinement Proof for the Example. Trivet ’s refinement proof scaffold first applies the case decomposition process to discharge the source entry block’s poison and immediate UB cases ( e.g. 𝑝 = 0 violates assume pnz ). For the remaining cases, the scaffold leaves target-specific UB obligations and three loop-specific holes: 1. Target-specific UB. Proofs that the target’s mul nuw cannot overflow and that 𝑝 ≠ 0 for udiv n, p .2. Loop invariant. A predicate 𝐼 (𝑛, 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑥, 𝑞 ) relating the tgt 

inputs ( 𝑛 , 𝑎 , and 𝑏 ) to the src loop state ( 𝑥 , and 𝑞 ). 3. Inductive step. A proof that 𝐼 is preserved by (𝑥, 𝑞 ) ↦ → (𝑥 − 𝑏, 𝑞 + 1) when 𝑥 ≥ 𝑏 and implies 𝑞 = ⌊𝑛 /𝑝 ⌋ when 

𝑥 < 𝑏 .Chunhao Liao, Hongxu Xu, Xintong Zhou, Yizhou Zhang, and Chengnian Sun 

Table 1. General and loop-specific holes in the preliminary loop-containing scaffold.       

> Type Hole and Role
> General •Target-specific UB : rules out each relevant target-side UB condition whenever the source is defined. Loop-specific •Loop invariant : summarizes the reachable source-loop state and function inputs. •Inductive step : preserves the invariant and proves equality with the target result at loop exit. •Final assembly : establishes the invariant at loop entry, then uses the inductive proof to establish refinement for any number of loop iterations.

4. Final assembly. A proof establishing 𝐼 at loop entry, where 

(𝑥, 𝑞 ) = (⌊ 𝑛 /𝑎 ⌋, 0), and using the inductive step to show that the source loop’s result equals ⌊𝑛 /𝑝 ⌋.The LLM completes the proof by filling these holes as follows: 1. Target-specific UB. It uses 𝑎 · 𝑏 < 264 and 𝑝 ≠ 0 from the source entry conditions to exclude overflow in mul nuw 

and division by zero in udiv n, p .2. Loop invariant. It defines 𝐼 to require well-defined inputs and loop values, 0 < 𝑎 · 𝑏 < 264 , and 𝑞 + ⌊ 𝑥 /𝑏 ⌋ = ⌊𝑛 /( 𝑎 ·

𝑏 )⌋ . Here, 𝑞 and ⌊𝑥 /𝑏 ⌋ count completed and remaining subtractions, respectively. 3. Inductive step. On the back edge ( 𝑥 ≥ 𝑏 ), it derives 𝑞 + 1 <

264 from 𝐼 , so neither 𝑥 − 𝑏 nor 𝑞 + 1 wraps. It then uses 

⌊𝑥 /𝑏 ⌋ = 1+ ⌊( 𝑥 −𝑏 )/ 𝑏 ⌋ to prove that (𝑥, 𝑞 ) ↦ → ( 𝑥 −𝑏, 𝑞 +1)

preserves 𝐼 . At exit ( 𝑥 < 𝑏 ), ⌊𝑥 /𝑏 ⌋ = 0 gives 𝑞 = ⌊𝑛 /𝑝 ⌋,matching the target result. 4. Final assembly. At loop entry, 𝑥 = ⌊𝑛 /𝑎 ⌋ and 𝑞 = 0. The source entry conditions and the identity ⌊⌊ 𝑛 /𝑎 ⌋/ 𝑏 ⌋ =

⌊𝑛 /( 𝑎 · 𝑏 )⌋ establish 𝐼 for this initial state. The LLM com-bines this initialization proof with the inductive step to prove refinement for any number of loop iterations. 

Trivet checks the completed proof following § 3.1.3. 

3.3.2 Loop-Aware Counterexample Certification. The counterexample branch extends the loop-free workflow in § 3.2. The LLM proposes a counterexample candidate with concrete bitwidths, inputs, and an execution bound that lim-its the loop iteration count and ensures evaluation terminates. The scaffold accepts a counterexample candidate only if the loop execution completes within this bound. Otherwise, the scaffold rejects the candidate and requests a new one. Given this candidate, Trivet reuses the deterministic stages from § 3.2.3: decidable comparison of execution outcomes, certifi-cation of the concrete candidate, and construction of a proof of non-refinement from the certified counterexample. Follow-ing the loop-free workflow in § 3.2, Trivet allows at most five counterexample generation attempts per transformation. 

3.4 Implementation and Limitations 

We build Trivet on top of the LLVM dialect in Lean-MLIR [6], a Lean 4 framework that formalizes the semantics of MLIR programs: it parses MLIR code into well-typed Lean terms with precise per-operation semantics, so that properties of MLIR programs become Lean theorems. Using MLIR’s trans-lation mechanisms [42], LLVM IR converts bidirectionally to and from the LLVM dialect without loss of semantic in-formation [41]. However, Lean-MLIR originally modeled only a simplified subset of the LLVM dialect. To enable translation validation of real-world transformations, we extended it along three dimensions: 1 refining its semantic foundations to support immediate UB and transformation preconditions, 2 adding missing bit-manipulation operators ( e.g. ctpop , cttz , ctlz ), and 3 generalizing the framework to multiple symbolic-bitwidth parameters and multi-block transformations. In Trivet , the LLM operates as an agent: we use the Codex CLI [46] with the gpt-5.5 model [48] to perform proof com-pletion in the refinement branch and counterexample pro-posal in the counterexample branch. Trivet itself remains a deterministic harness, accepting the agent’s output only after the Lean kernel checks the resulting proof. Our formalization currently targets integer instructions, and our workflows support loop-free, single-block trans-formations plus a restricted class of loop-containing ones. Extending the formalization to memory operations, floating-point arithmetic, and richer loop classes is left as future work. 

## 4 Evaluation 

This section presents our extensive evaluation of Trivet ,demonstrating its effectiveness in automating translation validation for LLVM transformations. We organize our eval-uation around four research questions: 

• RQ1: Can Trivet effectively validate real-world valid LLVM transformations? 

• RQ2: Can Trivet effectively refute real-world invalid LLVM transformations? 

• RQ3: Can Trivet effectively validate and refute loop-containing LLVM transformations derived from real-world cases? 

• RQ4: What is the impact of Trivet ’s scaffold on refinement and counterexample proof generation? We intentionally separate loop-free (RQ1 and RQ2) and loop-containing transformations (RQ3) because Alive2 offers different guarantees. For loop-free transformations, Alive2 can validate them under its modeled semantics, while for loop-containing transformations, it only provides bounded guarantees due to its finite loop unrolling [38]. 

Setup. All experiments were conducted on an Ubuntu 22.04 (64-bit) server equipped with a 32-core Intel Xeon Gold 5217 CPU @ 3.00GHz and 376 GB of RAM. We applied a time limit of two hours per transformation across all RQs. Since LLVM Translation Validation Automated with Large Language Models and Lean 

Table 2. Dataset Composition                             

> Bitwidth Loop Structure RQ Validity Fixed Symbolic Total
> Loop-free RQ1 Valid 30 30 60 RQ2 Invalid 30 30 60 Loop-containing RQ3 Valid 7714 RQ3 Invalid 7714 Overall ––74 74 148

Trivet does not support undef for the reasons discussed in § 2.1, we ran Alive2 with –disable-undef-input ; this con-figuration ensures a fair comparison because our dataset has no other mechanism for introducing undef . As the under-lying LLM, Trivet uses gpt-5.5 with extra-high reasoning effort. 

4.1 Dataset 

Our dataset comprises 148 real-world LLVM transformation instances from the LLVM GitHub repository. Table 2 summa-rizes their distribution by loop structure, validity, bitwidth, and research question. 

Loop-Free Dataset. The loop-free dataset contains fixed-and symbolic-bitwidth cases. In the fixed-bitwidth portion, Alive2 proves the 15 valid cases and refutes the 15 invalid cases within its standard 10 s time limit. The remaining 15 valid cases and 15 invalid cases involve nonlinear bit-vector operations, interdepen-dent preconditions, and relatively large but common con-crete bitwidths ( e.g. i32 and i64 ). These structures make it challenging for SMT-based methods such as Alive2 to finish within the standard 10 s time limit [45]. We include these cases to assess whether Trivet can validate or refute trans-formations that are challenging for SMT-based methods. In the symbolic-bitwidth portion, we derive each valid case by applying the transformation-generalization techniques developed in prior work [21, 43] to its fixed-bitwidth coun-terpart. We manually construct each invalid case from its fixed-bitwidth counterpart by replacing the concrete integer bitwidth with a symbolic one, because these techniques do not support the generalization of invalid transformations. 

Loop-Containing Dataset. The loop-containing dataset comprises 14 valid and 14 invalid transformations. Each group contains equal numbers of fixed- and symbolic-bitwidth cases. Each transformation replaces a three-basic-block source function with a loop-free target function with a single ba-sic block. We derive each symbolic-bitwidth case from its fixed-bitwidth counterpart by manually replacing the con-crete integer bitwidth with a symbolic one because prior transformation-generalization techniques [21, 43] do not support loop-containing transformations. 

Table 3. Trivet versus Alive2 on 60 valid transformations.                             

> Trivet Alive2 Stratum 𝑁 Proved Mean (s) Proved Mean (s)
> Symbolic bitwidth 30 30 722 n/a n/a Fixed bitwidth 30 30 647 20 206 Total 60 60 684 20 206 100 300 1k 3k 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
> 333 s 602 s 895 s 1748 s
> Trivet : 30/30 Alive2: n/a
> Trivet : 138–1748 s Alive2: n/a Validation time (s)
> Fraction validated
> Symbolic Bitwidth
> 100 300 1k 3k 7.2k
> 344 s 484 s 758 s 2635 s
> Trivet : 30/30 Alive2: 20/30
> Trivet : 197–2635 s Alive2: 0.032–7200 s Validation time (s)
> Fixed Bitwidth

Figure 5. Validation time distributions for RQ1 (log scale). 

4.2 RQ1: Validating Transformations 

In RQ1, we investigate whether Trivet can establish refine-ment for real-world LLVM transformations and compare its validation capability with Alive2. Table 3 summarizes the aggregate results for both systems on the same 60 transfor-mations and Figure 5 shows the validation-time distributions. 

4.2.1 Experimental Results. Trivet validates all 60 trans-formations, with median and mean validation times of 522 s and 684 s, respectively. Alive2 applies only to the 30 fixed-bitwidth transformations and validates 20; the remaining 10 runs do not complete within the time limit. For the symbolic-bitwidth cases, Trivet validates all 30 cases in 138–1748 s, with a median of 614 s and a mean of 722 s. Each generated theorem is parametric in the bitwidth and establishes refinement for every width satisfying the required constraints ( e.g. 𝑤 mod 2 = 0). Since Alive2 does not support transformations with symbolic bitwidths, Table 3 reports “n/a” for these cases. For the fixed-bitwidth cases, Alive2 takes less than 1 s to validate each of the 15 cases, whereas Trivet validates the same cases with a median of 463 s and a mean of 487 s. In the remaining 15 challenging cases, Alive2 validates only 5 within the time limit of two hours; its successful runs have a median of 941 s and a mean of 823 s. In contrast, 

Trivet validates all 15 challenging cases in 207–1257 s, with a median of 492 s. Overall, Alive2 is faster on the 15 cases but validates only a subset of the 15 challenging cases, whereas 

Trivet validates all fixed-bitwidth cases. 

4.2.2 Result Analysis. The symbolic-bitwidth results show that a single Trivet proof establishes refinement for all ad-missible widths rather than for one concrete instantiation, providing a width-independent guarantee outside Alive2’s Chunhao Liao, Hongxu Xu, Xintong Zhou, Yizhou Zhang, and Chengnian Sun 

Table 4. Trivet versus Alive2 on 60 invalid transformations.                             

> Trivet Alive2 Stratum 𝑁 Refuted Mean (s) Refuted Mean (s)
> Symbolic bitwidth 30 30 66 n/a n/a Fixed bitwidth 30 30 56 29 47 Total 60 60 61 29 47 20 50 100 300 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
> 44 s 56 s 69 s 204 s
> Trivet : 30/30 Alive2: n/a Alive2: n/a
> Trivet : 32–204 s Refutation Time (s)
> fraction refuted
> Symbolic Bitwidth
> 0.1 110 100 1k
> 34 s 46 s 69 s 210 s
> Trivet : 30/30 Alive2: 29/30
> Trivet : 31–210 s Alive2: 0.08–1023 s Refutation Time (s)
> Fixed Bitwidth

Figure 6. Refutation time distributions for RQ2 (log scale). supported scope. For fixed bitwidths, Alive2 exhibits a perfor-mance cliff as proof difficulty increases. Similarly, the original Alive2 study found that extending the timeout from one to five minutes yielded less than 5% additional results [38]. By contrast, Trivet exhibits more consistent runtimes across the fixed-bitwidth cases. The performance cliff stems primarily from two factors: Alive2’s whole-function refinement formulation and the bit-blasting in the SMT solver. Alive2 encodes the complete source and target functions rather than decomposing vali-dation into smaller independent obligations, producing in-creasingly difficult queries as the transformations grow more complex. Moreover, this difficulty is exacerbated by the bit-blasting mechanism, especially for transformations involving nonlinear operators ( e.g. div, mul, and urem). Although bit-blasting enables automated reasoning via SAT, expanding 

𝑤 -bit operations into Boolean circuits obscures their alge-braic structure and makes particular arithmetic operations expensive to solve [4, 14, 45]. In contrast, Trivet leverages the LLM’s algebraic reasoning capabilities to decompose com-plex proof obligations, completing the proof step by step, thereby avoiding this performance cliff. Prior work shows that bit-blasting can be extremely ex-pensive at common bitwidths such as 32 bits [45]; whole-function refinement checking can further amplify this cost. For example, consider a simple transformation  (𝑥 /u𝑦 ) · 𝑦 ≤

𝑥  =⇒ true , where /u denotes unsigned integer division. Although this transformation is clearly valid under LLVM semantics, Alive2 times out on its i32 instance after two hours, whereas Trivet validates the same i32 instance in 339 s. 

4.3 RQ2: Refuting Invalid Transformations 

In RQ2, we investigate whether Trivet can refute real-world invalid LLVM transformations and compare its refutation capability with Alive2. Table 4 summarizes the aggregate results, while Figure 6 shows the corresponding refutation-time distributions. 

4.3.1 Experimental Results. Trivet produces certified refutations for all 60 invalid transformations, with a mean refutation time of 61 s. Candidate generation accounts for 47 s (77%), while scaffold-based certification accounts for 14 s (23%). For the symbolic-bitwidth transformations, Trivet re-futes all 30 cases in 32–204 s, with a median of 56 s and a mean of 66 s. For each case, the LLM proposes a counterex-ample candidate containing concrete bitwidths and input values, which the scaffold automatically certifies. For the fixed-bitwidth transformations, Trivet refutes all 30 cases in 31–210 s, with a median of 46 s and a mean of 56 s. In con-trast, Alive2 refutes 29 and times out on the remaining one. Successful runs take 0.08–1023 s, with a median of 0.103 s and a mean of 47 s. 

4.3.2 Result Analysis. The symbolic-bitwidth results show that Trivet can refute a width-parametric transformation by certifying a counterexample that instantiates both the bitwidth and inputs, extending coverage beyond Alive2’s scope. For fixed bitwidths, Alive2 is faster on most cases but still exhibits a pronounced long tail and leaves one case unresolved after two hours, consistent with its behavior on valid transformations in § 4.2. In contrast, Trivet has more concentrated runtimes and refutes every case. 

4.4 RQ3: Loop-Containing Transformations 

Table 5 summarizes the experimental results for the 28 in-stances. Trivet provides refinement proofs for all valid cases at both fixed and symbolic bitwidths. The symbolic proofs establish correctness for all widths and inputs, with median and mean proof-generation times of 1471.2 s and 1673.5 s. The fixed-width runs have corresponding times of 1741.7 s and 1821.7 s. Fixed-width refutation certifies 6/7 invalid cases, with a median time of 211.1 s. Symbolic-width refutation certifies all 7 invalid cases, with a median of 87.5 s. Each symbolic counterexample specifies concrete inputs and a bitwidth. We omit Alive2 because it does not support sym-bolic bitwidths and establishes correctness only within a user-configurable unrolling bound, rather than proving the transformation correct for all loop iteration counts [38]. For the unresolved invalid transformation, Trivet exhausted its counterexample candidate attempts after 306 s without finding a certified counterexample. With 𝑥, 𝑛, 𝑎 𝑖 : i32 , the transformation replaces a loop with a multiplication: 

𝑎 0 = 0, 𝑎 𝑖 +1 = 𝑎 𝑖 + 𝑥, return 𝑎 𝑛 → return (𝑥 × 𝑛 ).LLVM Translation Validation Automated with Large Language Models and Lean 

Table 5. RQ3 results for loop-containing transformations.                          

> Bitwidth Task 𝑁 Succeeded Median (s) Mean (s)
> Symbolic Validation 771471.2 1673.5 Fixed Validation 771741.7 1821.7 Symbolic Refutation 7787.5 88.6 Fixed Refutation 76211.1 207.8

Table 6. Scaffold ablation results. Mean runtimes are in sec-onds for successful cases in both configurations. The column 

Δ is the cost reduction from Trivet − to Trivet .                                                                                                                             

> Successful Mean Runtime (s) Mean Cost (USD) Bitwidth 𝑁 Trivet −Trivet Trivet −Trivet Speedup Trivet −Trivet Δ
> Refinement proofs (loop-free)
> Symbolic 30 24 30 3265.9 760.6 4.3 ×$13.93 $1.48 89.4% Fixed 30 23 30 2791.6 634.3 4.4 ×$12.49 $1.45 88.4% Total 60 47 60 3033.8 698.8 4.3 ×$13.23 $1.47 88.9%
> Counterexample proofs (loop-free)
> Symbolic 30 25 30 907.4 64.2 14.1 ×$2.80 $0.08 97.1% Fixed 30 24 30 934 58 16.1 ×$3.52 $0.08 97.7% Total 60 49 60 920.4 61.1 15.1 ×$3.15 $0.08 97.5%
> Refinement proofs (loop-containing)
> Symbolic 7672784.5 1446.6 1.9 ×$12.06 $2.76 77.1% Fixed 7673042.1 1603.4 1.9 ×$13.35 $3.10 76.8% Total 14 12 14 2913.3 1525 1.9 ×$12.7 $2.93 76.9%
> Counterexample proofs (loop-containing)
> Symbolic 777697.2 88.6 7.9 ×$2.20 $0.12 94.5% Fixed 766842.4 207.8 4.1 ×$2.40 $0.37 84.6% Total 14 13 13 764.22 143.62 5.3 ×$2.29 $0.24 89.7%

For x=poison , n=0 , the source executes no loop iterations, leaving the accumulator at its initial value of zero. The tar-get instead evaluates x * n , which propagates poison. Al-though the arithmetic identity holds for defined operands, the rewrite introduces a dependence on x into the source’s otherwise constant return value when n=0 .

4.5 RQ4: Ablation Study 

In RQ4, we assess the contribution of the scaffold by com-paring Trivet with its unscaffolded variant Trivet − , which requires the LLM to generate complete Lean proofs from scratch. Keeping all other experimental settings fixed and evaluating on the RQ1–RQ3 datasets, we measure proof suc-cess rate, runtime, and monetary cost in the ablation study. 

4.5.1 Success Rate and Runtime. For loop-free transfor-mations, Table 6 shows that Trivet completes all refinement and counterexample proofs. In contrast, Trivet − succeeds on 47 of 60 refinement cases and 49 of 60 counterexample cases. Among cases successfully completed by both configurations, 

Trivet is faster in every case. The speedups in mean runtime are 4.3 × for refinement and 15.1 × for counterexamples. For loop-containing transformations, Trivet − and Trivet prove 12 and 14 of 14 valid instances, respectively, and refute 13 and 13 of 14 invalid instances. Among cases solved by both con-figurations, the ratios of baseline to scaffolded mean runtime are 1.9 × for refinement and 5.3 × for counterexamples. These results are consistent with scaffolding reducing proof generation overhead. We observe that generating proofs from scratch can be inefficient due to extensive tactic explo-ration and repeated proof attempts, with loose proof struc-ture and diverse UB cases adding further complexity. In con-trast, the scaffold guides the LLM through well-defined sub-goals, yielding proofs with a clearer logical structure. 

4.5.2 Monetary Cost. We report per-transformation proof-generation costs based on OpenAI’s pricing as of September 2026 [47]. For loop-free transformations, mean costs decrease from $13.23 to $1.47 for the 47 valid cases and from $3.15 to $0.08 for the 49 invalid cases, corresponding to reductions of 88.9% and 97.5%, respectively. For loop-containing transfor-mations with complete usage records, mean costs decrease from $12.7 to $2.93 for refinement proofs and from $2.29 to $0.24 for counterexample proofs. 

## 5 Related Work 

We review the following three areas related to Trivet .

Translation Validation. Translation validation checks individual compiler runs or transformations rather than veri-fying the compiler implementation [1, 44, 49]. Equality-based approaches use equality saturation or normalized value graphs to check LLVM and MLIR transformations [50, 56, 61]. Alive [39] and Alive2 [38] provide SMT-based refinement checking for LLVM. AliveInLean follows this design by verifying its con-dition generator in Lean but still relies on an SMT solver, whereas Crellvm checks compiler-emitted proofs with a Coq-verified validator [15, 19]. Trivet instead uses an LLM to synthesize per-transformation Lean proofs checked by the kernel. 

LLMs for Compilers. Recent work applies LLMs to com-piler optimization and debugging. For optimization devel-opment, LPO [58] discovers formally verified peephole opti-mizations, while LPG [21] generalizes concrete optimiza-tions into reusable rules. Recent studies evaluate agents implementing LLVM optimizations [13, 57]. For compiler debugging, LPR and subsequent agentic work minimize bug-triggering programs [63, 66]. By contrast, Trivet uses an LLM to construct correctness or counterexample proofs for a given transformation, with Lean checking the result. 

LLMs for Interactive Theorem Proving. LLMs have been used to automate proof construction in interactive theorem provers. LeanDojo and Rango use retrieval augmentation for Lean and Rocq, respectively [55, 59]. COPRA combines stateful search with prover feedback, while PALM itera-tively repairs generated proofs [40, 53]. Trivet applies LLM-based proof synthesis to LLVM translation validation, using a domain-specific scaffold to produce machine-checked proofs in Lean. Chunhao Liao, Hongxu Xu, Xintong Zhou, Yizhou Zhang, and Chengnian Sun 

## 6 Conclusion 

This paper presents Trivet , a framework integrating LLMs and Lean for automated LLVM translation validation. By combining deterministic scaffolds, LLM-guided proof syn-thesis, and Lean kernel checking, Trivet produces refinement and counterexample proofs for fixed and symbolic bitwidths, covering loop-free transformations and a restricted class of loop-containing ones. Our evaluation shows that Trivet vali-dates transformations beyond the practical reach of Alive2, the state-of-the-art SMT-based validator, while scaffolding improves proof completion and efficiency. 

## References 

[1] Clark Barrett, Yi Fang, Benjamin Goldberg, Ying Hu, Amir Pnueli, and Lenore Zuck. 2005. TVOC: a translation validator for optimizing com-pilers. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (Edinburgh, Scotland, UK) (CAV’05) . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 291–295. doi: 10.1007/11513988_29 

[2] Clark Barrett, Pascal Fontaine, and Cesare Tinelli. 2025. The SMT-LIB Standard: Version 2.7 . Technical Report. Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa. http://www.SMT-LIB.org 

[3] Clark Barrett, Roberto Sebastiani, Sanjit A. Seshia, and Cesare Tinelli. 2021. Satisfiability Modulo Theories. In Handbook of Satisfiability 

(second ed.), Armin Biere, Marijn Heule, Hans van Maaren, and Toby Walsh (Eds.). IOS Press, Chapter 33, 1267–1329. [4] Max Barth, Matthias Heizmann, and Jochen Hoenicke. 2026. A lazy and modular approach to int-blasting. Acta Inf. 63, 2 (April 2026), 33 pages. doi: 10.1007/s00236-026-00529-y 

[5] Calvin Beck, Irene Yoon, Hanxi Chen, Yannick Zakowski, and Steve Zdancewic. 2024. A Two-Phase Infinite/Finite Low-Level Memory Model: Reconciling Integer–Pointer Casts, Finite Space, and undef at the LLVM IR Level of Abstraction. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 8, ICFP, Article 263 (Aug. 2024), 29 pages. doi: 10.1145/3674652 

[6] Siddharth Bhat, Alex Keizer, Chris Hughes, Andrés Goens, and Tobias Grosser. 2024. Verifying Peephole Rewriting in SSA Compiler IRs. In 

15th International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP 2024) (Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), Vol. 309) , Yves Bertot, Temur Kutsia, and Michael Norrish (Eds.). Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany, 9:1–9:20. doi: 10. 4230/LIPIcs.ITP.2024.9 

[7] Raymond T. Boute. 1992. The Euclidean definition of the functions div and mod. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 14, 2 (April 1992), 127–144. doi: 10.1145/128861.128862 

[8] Tej Chajed, Joseph Tassarotti, Mark Theng, Ralf Jung, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. 2021. GoJournal: a verified, con-current, crash-safe journaling system. In 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 21) . USENIX Association, 423–439. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi21/ presentation/chajed 

[9] Yun-Sheng Chang, Ralf Jung, Upamanyu Sharma, Joseph Tassarotti, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. 2023. Verifying vMVCC, a high-performance transaction library using multi-version concurrency control. In 17th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 23) . USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 871–886. 

https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi23/presentation/chang 

[10] Leonardo De Moura, Soonho Kong, Jeremy Avigad, Floris Van Doorn, and Jakob von Raumer. 2015. The lean theorem prover (system de-scription). In International conference on automated deduction . Springer, 378–388. [11] Leonardo de Moura and Sebastian Ullrich. 2021. The Lean 4 The-orem Prover and Programming Language. In Automated Deduction – CADE 28: 28th International Conference on Automated Deduction, Virtual Event, July 12–15, 2021, Proceedings . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 625–635. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-79876-5_37 

[12] Robert W Floyd. 1993. Assigning meanings to programs. In Program Verification: Fundamental Issues in Computer Science . Springer, 65–81. [13] Batu Guan, Zirui Wang, and Shaohua Li. 2026. Understand-ing Agent-Based Patching of Compiler Missed Optimizations. arXiv:2607.02370 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.02370 

[14] Liana Hadarean, Kshitij Bansal, Dejan Jovanović, Clark Barrett, and Cesare Tinelli. 2014. A Tale of Two Solvers: Eager and Lazy Ap-proaches to Bit-Vectors. In Computer Aided Verification , Armin Biere and Roderick Bloem (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 680–695. [15] Jeehoon Kang, Yoonseung Kim, Youngju Song, Juneyoung Lee, Sanghoon Park, Mark Dongyeon Shin, Yonghyun Kim, Sungkeun Cho, Joonwon Choi, Chung-Kil Hur, and Kwangkeun Yi. 2018. Crel-lvm: verified credible compilation for LLVM. In Proceedings of the 39th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Philadelphia, PA, USA) (PLDI 2018) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 631–645. doi: 10.1145/ 3192366.3192377 

[16] Chris Lattner and Vikram Adve. 2004. LLVM: A Compilation Frame-work for Lifelong Program Analysis & Transformation. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization: Feedback-Directed and Runtime Optimization (Palo Alto, California) 

(CGO ’04) . IEEE Computer Society, USA, 75. [17] Vu Le, Mehrdad Afshari, and Zhendong Su. 2014. Compiler valida-tion via equivalence modulo inputs. In Proceedings of the 35th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Imple-mentation (Edinburgh, United Kingdom) (PLDI ’14) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 216–226. doi: 10.1145/ 2594291.2594334 

[18] Hayley Leblanc, Nathan Taylor, James Bornholt, and Vijay Chi-dambaram. 2025. SquirrelFS: Using the Rust Compiler to Check File-System Crash Consistency. ACM Trans. Storage 21, 4, Article 27 (Nov. 2025), 39 pages. doi: 10.1145/3769109 

[19] Juneyoung Lee, Chung-Kil Hur, and Nuno P. Lopes. 2019. AliveInLean: A Verified LLVM Peephole Optimization Verifier. In Computer Aided Verification , Isil Dillig and Serdar Tasiran (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 445–455. [20] Juneyoung Lee, Dongjoo Kim, Chung-Kil Hur, and Nuno P. Lopes. 2021. An SMT Encoding of LLVM’s Memory Model for Bounded Trans-lation Validation. In Computer Aided Verification: 33rd International Conference, CAV 2021, Virtual Event, July 20–23, 2021, Proceedings, Part II . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 752–776. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-81688-9_35 

[21] Chunhao Liao, Hongxu Xu, Xintong Zhou, Zhenyang Xu, and Cheng-nian Sun. 2026. Leveraging Large Language Models for Gener-alizing Peephole Optimizations. arXiv:2603.18477 [cs.PL] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2603.18477 

[22] LLVM Project. 2022. Missed optimization for -(foo < 0) in Clang when foo was previously sign-extended and in LLVM for all cases. 

https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/57381 

[23] LLVM Project. 2025. Missed Optimization: Fold a Same-Sign Unsigned Comparison into a Zero-Sum Test. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/166890 

[24] LLVM Project. 2026. InstCombine Contributor Guide. https://llvm. org/docs/InstCombineContributorGuide.html . Accessed: 2026-04-30. [25] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM IR Undefined Behavior (UB) Manual. 

https://llvm.org/docs/UndefinedBehavior.html . Accessed: 2026-07-13. [26] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM IR Undefined Behavior (UB) Manual: Summary. https://llvm.org/docs/UndefinedBehavior.html#summary .Accessed: 2026-07-25. LLVM Translation Validation Automated with Large Language Models and Lean 

[27] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Language Reference Manual: Immediate Undefined Behavior. https://llvm.org/docs/UndefinedBehavior.html# immediate-ub . Accessed: 2026-07-13. [28] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Language Reference Manual: ’llvm.assume’ Intrinsic. https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#llvm-assume-intrinsic .Accessed: 2026-07-26. [29] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Language Reference Manual: Poison Values. https://llvm.org/docs/UndefinedBehavior.html#poison-values .Accessed: 2026-07-13. [30] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Language Reference Manual: Poison Values. https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#poison-values . Accessed: 2026-07-25. [31] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Language Reference Manual: ’select’ Instruction. https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#select-instruction .Accessed: 2026-09-09. [32] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Language Reference Manual: Undefined Values. https://llvm.org/docs/UndefinedBehavior.html#undef-values .Accessed: 2026-07-13. [33] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Language Reference Manual: Well-Defined Values. https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#well-defined-values . Ac-cessed: 2026-09-08. [34] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Loop Idiom Recognize Pass Source Code. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/llvm/lib/ Transforms/Scalar/LoopIdiomRecognize.cpp Idiom recognizers gated on getNumBlocks() == 1 and getNumBackEdges() == 1 .[35] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Loop Pass Manager Source Code. https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/ llvm/include/llvm/Transforms/Scalar/LoopPassManager.h 

FunctionToLoopPassAdaptor runs LoopSimplify and LCSSA 

before every loop pass. [36] LLVM Project. 2026. LLVM Loop Terminology (and Canonical Forms). 

https://llvm.org/docs/LoopTerminology.html#loop-simplify-form Ac-cessed: 2026-09-03. [37] Pedro Lobo, John McIver, George Mitenkov, Juneyoung Lee, Kirshan-than Sundararajah, and Nuno P. Lopes. 2026. Towards Removing Undef Values from LLVM IR. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 10, PLDI, Article 172 (June 2026), 24 pages. doi: 10.1145/3808250 

[38] Nuno P. Lopes, Juneyoung Lee, Chung-Kil Hur, Zhengyang Liu, and John Regehr. 2021. Alive2: bounded translation validation for LLVM. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Virtual, Canada) 

(PLDI 2021) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 65–79. doi: 10.1145/3453483.3454030 

[39] Nuno P. Lopes, David Menendez, Santosh Nagarakatte, and John Regehr. 2015. Provably correct peephole optimizations with alive. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Portland, OR, USA) (PLDI ’15) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 22–32. doi: 10.1145/2737924.2737965 

[40] Minghai Lu, Benjamin Delaware, and Tianyi Zhang. 2024. Proof Automation with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering 

(Sacramento, CA, USA) (ASE ’24) . Association for Computing Machin-ery, New York, NY, USA, 1509–1520. doi: 10.1145/3691620.3695521 

[41] MLIR Project. 2026. ‘llvm’ Dialect. https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/ LLVM/ . Accessed: 2026-05-03. [42] MLIR Project. 2026. LLVM IR Target. https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/ TargetLLVMIR/ . Accessed: 2026-07-22. [43] Manasij Mukherjee and John Regehr. 2024. Hydra: Generalizing Peep-hole Optimizations with Program Synthesis. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 

8, OOPSLA1, Article 120 (April 2024), 29 pages. doi: 10.1145/3649837 

[44] George C. Necula. 2000. Translation validation for an optimizing compiler. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2000 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada) (PLDI ’00) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 83–94. doi: 10.1145/349299.349314 

[45] Aina Niemetz, Mathias Preiner, and Yoni Zohar. 2024. Scalable Bit-Blasting with Abstractions. In Computer Aided Verification: 36th Inter-national Conference, CAV 2024, Montreal, QC, Canada, July 24–27, 2024, Proceedings, Part I (Montreal, QC, Canada). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 178–200. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-65627-9_9 

[46] OpenAI. 2025. Codex CLI. https://github.com/openai/codex Accessed: 2026-09-10. [47] OpenAI. 2026. API Pricing. https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/ pricing Accessed: 2026-09-06. [48] OpenAI. 2026. GPT-5.5 Model. https://developers.openai.com/api/ docs/models/gpt-5.5 Accessed: 2026-09-06. [49] Amir Pnueli, Michael Siegel, and Eli Singerman. 1998. Translation Validation. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS ’98) .Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 151–166. [50] Michael Stepp, Ross Tate, and Sorin Lerner. 2011. Equality-based translation validator for LLVM. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (Snowbird, UT) (CAV’11) .Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 737–742. [51] Chengnian Sun, Vu Le, Qirun Zhang, and Zhendong Su. 2016. Toward understanding compiler bugs in GCC and LLVM. In Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis 

(Saarbrücken, Germany) (ISSTA 2016) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 294–305. doi: 10.1145/2931037.2931074 

[52] The Rocq Development Team. 2025. The Rocq Prover . doi: 10.5281/ zenodo.15149629 

[53] Amitayush Thakur, George Tsoukalas, Yeming Wen, Jimmy Xin, and Swarat Chaudhuri. 2024. An In-Context Learning Agent for Formal Theorem-Proving. In First Conference on Language Modeling . https: //openreview.net/forum?id=V7HRrxXUhN 

[54] The Lean Project. [n. d.]. standard-axioms. The Lean Language Refer-ence. https://lean-lang.org/doc/reference/latest/Axioms/#standard-axioms Accessed 2026-07-28. [55] Kyle Thompson, Nuno Saavedra, Pedro Carrott, Kevin Fisher, Alex Sanchez-Stern, Yuriy Brun, João F. Ferreira, Sorin Lerner, and Emily First. 2025. Rango: Adaptive Retrieval-Augmented Proving for Auto-mated Software Verification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 47th Inter-national Conference on Software Engineering (Ottawa, Ontario, Canada) 

(ICSE ’25) . IEEE Press, 347–359. doi: 10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00161 

[56] Jean-Baptiste Tristan, Paul Govereau, and Greg Morrisett. 2011. Eval-uating value-graph translation validation for LLVM. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language De-sign and Implementation (San Jose, California, USA) (PLDI ’11) . As-sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 295–305. doi: 10.1145/1993498.1993533 

[57] Hongxu Xu, Chunhao Liao, Xintong Zhou, and Chengnian Sun. 2026. Can Coding Agents Implement Missed Compiler Optimiza-tions? Evaluating LLM Agents on LLVM Peephole Optimizations. arXiv:2607.02684 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.02684 

[58] Zhenyang Xu, Hongxu Xu, Yongqiang Tian, Xintong Zhou, and Cheng-nian Sun. 2026. LPO: Discovering Missed Peephole Optimizations with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Inter-national Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Lan-guages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 (USA) (ASPLOS ’26) . Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1136–1150. doi: 10.1145/3779212.3790184 

[59] Kaiyu Yang, Aidan Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan J Prenger, and Animashree Anandku-mar. 2023. LeanDojo: Theorem Proving with Retrieval-Augmented Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (Eds.), Vol. 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 21573–21612. Chunhao Liao, Hongxu Xu, Xintong Zhou, Yizhou Zhang, and Chengnian Sun 

doi: 10.52202/075280-0944 

[60] Xuejun Yang, Yang Chen, Eric Eide, and John Regehr. 2011. Find-ing and understanding bugs in C compilers. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (San Jose, California, USA) (PLDI ’11) . Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 283–294. doi: 10.1145/1993498.1993532 

[61] Jiaqi Yin, Zhan Song, Nicolas Bohm Agostini, Antonino Tumeo, and Cunxi Yu. 2025. HEC: equivalence verification checking for code trans-formation via equality saturation. In Proceedings of the 2025 USENIX Conference on Usenix Annual Technical Conference (Boston, MA, USA) 

(USENIX ATC ’25) . USENIX Association, USA, Article 69, 16 pages. [62] Yannick Zakowski, Calvin Beck, Irene Yoon, Ilia Zaichuk, Vadim Zaliva, and Steve Zdancewic. 2021. Modular, compositional, and executable formal semantics for LLVM IR. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 5, ICFP, Article 67 (Aug. 2021), 30 pages. doi: 10.1145/3473572 

[63] Mengxiao Zhang, Yongqiang Tian, Zhenyang Xu, Yiwen Dong, Shin Hwei Tan, and Chengnian Sun. 2024. LPR: Large Language Models-Aided Program Reduction. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis 

(Vienna, Austria) (ISSTA 2024) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 261–273. doi: 10.1145/3650212.3652126 

[64] Jianzhou Zhao, Santosh Nagarakatte, Milo M.K. Martin, and Steve Zdancewic. 2012. Formalizing the LLVM intermediate represen-tation for verified program transformations. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (Philadelphia, PA, USA) (POPL ’12) . Asso-ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 427–440. doi: 10.1145/2103656.2103709 

[65] Jianzhou Zhao, Santosh Nagarakatte, Milo M.K. Martin, and Steve Zdancewic. 2013. Formal verification of SSA-based optimizations for LLVM. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Pro-gramming Language Design and Implementation (Seattle, Washington, USA) (PLDI ’13) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 175–186. doi: 10.1145/2491956.2462164 

[66] Xintong Zhou, Hongxu Xu, Chunhao Liao, Puzhuo Liu, Yongqiang Tian, and Chengnian Sun. 2026. Semantic-aware and Self-improving Program Reduction via Agentic Large Language Models. arXiv:2607.03766 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.03766