Title: Automated Pre-Silicon Verification of High-Speed DDR5 and LPDDR5/6 Memory Controllers: Closed-Loop Timing, Mode Register, and PHY Synchronization in UVM

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.36111v1

Published Time: Wed, 30 Sep 2026 00:16:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
> IEEE D ESIGN & T EST PATEL AND MAJUMDER : A UTOMATED PRE -S ILICON VERIFICATION OF HIGH -S PEED DDR5 AND LPDDR5/6 M EMORY CONTROLLERS

# Automated Pre-Silicon Verification of High-Speed DDR5 and LPDDR5/6 Memory Controllers: Closed-Loop Timing, Mode Register, and PHY Synchronization in UVM 

Manan Patel (Member, IEEE) and Anirban Majumder (Member, IEEE) 

Google LLC, Mountain View, CA, USA — Google IT Services India Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru, India 

Abstract —External memory interfaces (such as LPDDR5/4 and DDR5) are essential components of modern mobile, cloud, and enterprise computing systems. While memory manufacturers focus on physical DRAM die develop-ment, the vast majority of semiconductor firms design custom application ASICs that require a dedicated Memory Controller to interface with these standardized external memories. Consequently, pre-silicon design verification of the Memory Controller RTL—acting as the Device Under Test (DUT) against a third-party DRAM Verification IP (VIP)—is a ubiquitous and critical challenge across the global semiconductor industry. This article presents an automated, pre-silicon configuration and closed-loop initialization framework for Memory Controller verifica-tion. The proposed solution parses JEDEC timing and configuration parameters directly from the DRAM VIP’s database files (such as Denali SOMA files) to configure the Memory Controller DUT’s registers, while a custom Mode Register Register Abstraction Layer (MR-RAL) tracks volatile DRAM VIP states in real-time. Furthermore, a dynamic, re-compilation-free PHY initialization flow randomizes interface parameters directly in the testbench, executes on-the-fly configuration generation via system calls, and parses the resulting register write sequences at runtime. By integrating these automated methodologies into pre-silicon verification flows, engineers can eliminate setup overhead, prevent false protocol violations, and enable comprehensive randomized testing of complex PHY and Memory Controller configurations. 

Index Terms —Closed-loop initialization, DDR5, DFI 5.1, DRAM Verification IP (VIP), LPDDR5, LPDDR6, mem-ory controller verification, Register Abstraction Layer (RAL), SOMA files, SystemVerilog, Universal Verification Methodology (UVM). I. I NTRODUCTION 

External DRAM is an essential component of all modern mo-bile, cloud, and edge computing systems. While memory-die manufacturers focus on the physics and chemistry of memory cell arrays, the broader semiconductor industry focuses on de-signing custom application ASICs and System-on-Chips (SoCs) to accelerate specific workloads. To utilize standardized exter-nal DRAM (such as LPDDR5/4 or DDR5), these custom ASICs must integrate a dedicated Memory Controller. The Universal Verification Methodology (UVM) has become the standardized method for SoC verification, heavily relying on the integration of Verification IP (VIP) to model these complex external depen-dencies [1]. Validating these interfaces is increasingly complex (as summarized across JEDEC generations in Table I); for in-stance, LPDDR6 PHYs operating at 14,400 Mbps on advanced process nodes present severe signal integrity challenges, includ-ing simultaneous switching noise and inter-symbol interference caused by the simultaneous flipping of dozens of data lines on a parallel bus [2]. While physical signal integrity phenomena are validated using physical-level or SPICE-level simulations, the pre-silicon digital verification bottleneck lies in validating the complex Memory Reference Code (MRC) training algorithms that the digital controller executes to actively compensate for these channel distortions. Therefore, verifying the digital Mem-ory Controller RTL against external DRAM protocol standards is a critical, universal bottleneck for almost every semiconduc-tor company, except for specialized memory manufacturers [3]. Achieving successful Memory Reference Code (MRC) training requires utilizing specific controller logic to initiate transactions on the LPDDR/DDR bus to tune sampling timings for all signals, scaling boot speeds from 4800 MT/s up to 14,400 MT/s [2, 4]. In these pre-silicon verification environments, teams pair the Memory Controller Device Under Test (DUT) with a third-party memory VIP to simulate physical DRAM chips. This interface is heavily standardized, often relying on documents like the DDR PHY Interface (DFI) Specification version 5.1, which describes signals, timing parameters, and training sequences for the inter-face between DDR memory controllers and PHY layers [5]. However, because JEDEC specifications (such as DDR5 JESD79-5 [6], LPDDR5 JESD209-5 [7], and LPDDR6 JESD209-6 [2]) outline hundreds of interdependent timing pa-rameters that scale dynamically with clock frequency, synchro-nizing configurations between the Memory Controller DUT, the PHY, and the DRAM VIP remains a major industry challenge. Manually translating these dense, highly technical parameters across different simulation models introduces a massive risk of human error. A single parameter mismatch can trigger days of debugging overhead, masking actual design bugs behind false protocol violations. To address this, the industry requires a shift from static, manual configuration to automated, dynamic syn-chronization frameworks. 

II. B ACKGROUND AND CURRENT MEMORY 

CONTROLLER VERIFICATION CHALLENGES 

In a classical pre-silicon verification flow, memory timing and configuration parameters must be manually extracted and pro-grammed across multiple independent databases to align the Memory Controller DUT, PHY, and the DRAM VIP. This man-ual mapping is highly vulnerable to human error; a single tim-                                                                                             

> 1arXiv:2609.36111v1 [cs.AR] 28 Sep 2026 IEEE D ESIGN & T EST PATEL AND MAJUMDER : A UTOMATED PRE -S ILICON VERIFICATION OF HIGH -S PEED DDR5 AND LPDDR5/6 M EMORY CONTROLLERS
> TABLE I
> GENERATIONAL EVOLUTION OF JEDEC DRAM A RCHITECTURE AND PRE -S ILICON VERIFICATION COMPLEXITY (DDR4 TO LPDDR6)
> Architectural / DV Metric DDR4 (JESD79-4) DDR5 (JESD79-5 [6]) LPDDR5/5T (JESD209-5 [7]) LPDDR6 (JESD209-6 [2])
> Peak Data Rate per Pin 3,200 MT/s 6,400–8,800 MT/s 6,400–9,600 MT/s 10,667–14,400 MT/s Channel Organization 1×64-bit 2×32-bit sub-channels 16-bit multi-channel Dual 12-bit sub-channels (24-bit) Mode Registers (MRs) per Rank 7 (MR0–MR6) >64 (MR0–MR63+) >64 (DVFS/FSP banked) >64 (Extended train-ing/RAS MRs) Frequency-Scaled Timing Params ∼35 parameters >85 parameters >90 parameters >110 parameters PHY Init / Training Registers <250 registers >1,200 registers >1,500 registers >2,000 registers Classical Bring-Up per Speed-Bin 0.5–1 day (manual) 2–3 days (manual) 3–4 days (manual) 4–5+ days (manual)
> Proposed Automated Flow <5minutes <5minutes <5minutes <5minutes TABLE II
> COMPARISON OF CLASSICAL VS . A UTOMATED MEMORY VERIFICATION
> FLOWS
> Verification Metric Classical Static Flow Automated Closed-Loop Flow
> Parameter Extraction Manual mapping from datasheets Automated script parsing Re-compilation Re-quirement Required for every param-eter tweak Eliminated (Run-time dy-namic) MR Synchronization Manual database polling Dynamic MR-RAL mirror-ing Bring-up Overhead Multiple days per speed-bin
> <5 minutes per speed-bin

ing parameter mismatch between the DRAM VIP simulation model [8] and the Memory Controller DUT’s configuration reg-isters can result in false protocol violations, consuming valuable debugging overhead. Furthermore, high-speed memory PHY IPs require thousands of individual initialization and training parameters. In traditional verification flows, these parameters are often hardcoded directly into compiled SystemVerilog source files (such as packages or header files included via compiler directives) prior to compile-time. If a Design Verification (DV) engineer needs to modify a PHY setting—such as disabling a training stage or tweaking an impedance value—they must regenerate these source files and re-compile the entire simulation database. This compile-time dependency severely limits regression scaling and prevents the verification of dynamic, run-time parameter changes, as any parameter modification imposes a 100% recompilation penalty, grinding iterative debugging to a halt. An additional critical challenge in memory controller verifi-cation involves the synchronization of DRAM Mode Register (MR) configurations. The MR configuration state must be seen identically by both the Memory Controller DUT RTL and the DRAM VIP. The traditional verification approach is highly cum-bersome: engineers must manually retrieve MR-related config-urations from UVM configuration databases or static files. This static, multi-step process is prone to synchronization lag and state mismatches, rendering the verification of dynamic train-ing sequences highly error-prone. Table II illustrates the stark operational differences between this classical methodology and an automated closed-loop approach. 

III. A UTOMATED SOMA-TO -R EGISTER PARAMETER 

SYNCHRONIZATION 

To eliminate manual mapping overhead, we implemented an automated pipeline that extracts JEDEC timing and configura-tion parameters directly from the DRAM VIP’s Cadence Denali SOMA (Specification of Memory Architecture) files and pro-grams them into the Memory Controller DUT. The simulation behavior of a Cadence Denali VIP is largely dictated by these files; a .denalirc text file controls general simulation flow, while the SOMA file defines protocol standards and drivable val-ues [9]. Because SOMA is a Cadence-standard format used to parameterize verification models, it serves as an authoritative, machine-readable source of truth for all memory timing require-ments, including complex parameters such as CAS latency, row precharge time ( tRP ), and RAS-to-CAS delay ( tRCD ) [6–8]. During the pre-compilation phase (integrated into the build flow via Makefile ), an automated script parses these DRAM VIP SOMA files. To ensure the tools can locate these essential parameters, the simulation environment must properly configure the $DENALI environment variable to point to the correct VIP root directory. SOMA files contain certified timing specifica-tions expressed in physical time units (picoseconds or nanosec-onds) as well as clock cycles. Because the Memory Controller RTL operates on a digital clock domain, any parameter defined in physical time must be strictly converted into discrete clock cycles before it can be programmed into the DUT registers. Fur-thermore, the parsing script is designed to handle various speed-bins automatically, ensuring that when the simulation frequency changes, all dependent timing parameters are dynamically recal-culated without requiring manual intervention. For parameters defined in physical time units, the utility nor-malizes the values and translates them into clock cycles based on the active simulation frequency using JEDEC rounding conven-tions. This translation is mathematically expressed in (1), where the resulting cycle count is always rounded up to ensure timing constraints are never violated by being too short: 

Ncycles = ⌈Tparam × fCLK ⌉. (1) Here, Ncycles represents the calculated cycle count, Tparam is the JEDEC parameter in physical time, and fCLK is the active clock frequency. For parameters that are already defined in clock cycles, the script bypasses this translation and passes the values directly. The resolved clock cycles are then automatically mapped to their respective memory-mapped registers inside the Memory Con-troller DUT, generating a SystemVerilog configuration package that is subsequently compiled and elaborated. This ensures that the Memory Controller DUT, the physical layer, and the DRAM VIP operate in perfect clock-cycle synchronization, preventing false timing drift failures and completely automating the initial parameter programming phase. By automating this SOMA-to-register synchronization, verification engineers can seamlessly switch between different memory speed grades, such as moving from LPDDR5 4800 MT/s to 9600 MT/s in LPDDR5T, simply            

> 2IEEE D ESIGN & T EST PATEL AND MAJUMDER : A UTOMATED PRE -S ILICON VERIFICATION OF HIGH -S PEED DDR5 AND LPDDR5/6 M EMORY CONTROLLERS
> Fig. 1. Automated Mode Register (MR) tracking and dynamic mirroring flow.

by pointing the environment to a new SOMA file. This elimi-nates the days of manual datasheet transcription previously re-quired for each new configuration. Additionally, most DRAM vendors maintain SOMA configu-rations for their custom requirements, especially in cases where they deviate from the baseline JEDEC specifications. The auto-mated SOMA-to-register configuration flow allows the DV en-vironment to seamlessly migrate to vendor-specific timings. 

IV. S YNCHRONIZED MODE REGISTER (MR) VERIFICATION AND MODELING 

To resolve the state-matching bottleneck across DRAM bound-aries, we architected a unified Mode Register read/write API and a customized Mode Register Register Abstraction Layer (MR-RAL) model to align the Memory Controller DUT and the DRAM VIP. Volatile register fields undergo hardware-driven changes independently of bus transactions, rendering them in-visible to standard UVM prediction logic and necessitating ac-tive monitoring to keep the register abstraction layer synchro-nized [10]. Because DRAM Mode Registers are inherently volatile during initialization and training sequences, standard frontdoor polling is vastly insufficient. The unified MR API exposes a set of tasks that program-matically handle and verify MR reads and writes. Instead of manually extracting configurations, this API manages transac-tion generation and automatically synchronizes the MR states between the Memory Controller DUT RTL and the DRAM VIP. To track these volatile DRAM states on-the-fly, a dedicated reg-ister group within the UVM RAL block is paired with a passive interface monitor. In UVM, the passive prediction mode updates the register model using transactions captured by the Universal Verification Component (UVC) monitor without connecting the model to the UVC sequencer [1]. This allows the testbench to silently observe the bus. The synchronization process operates in three distinct phases, as depicted in Fig. 1. First, through Passive Bus Probing , the UVM monitor actively probes the physical interface bus to spy on transactions between the Memory Controller DUT and the DRAM VIP. To support complex multi-rank and multi-channel DDR5 topologies, the monitor also extracts active chip select (CS) and channel-routing signals. The passive predictor uses this routing metadata to map the extracted MR command to the corresponding rank-specific or channel-specific register block inside the hierarchical MR-RAL model. Second, during Com-mand Extraction , when the monitor detects a Mode Register Write (MRW) or Read (MRR) command, it extracts the target register address and the transferred data payload.  

> Fig. 2. Closed-loop PHY initialization execution sequence.

Finally, through Dynamic Mirroring , explicit prediction is utilized. While auto-prediction updates mirror values during frontdoor access, explicit prediction uses a uvm reg predictor 

component connected to the monitor’s analysis port to keep the register model updated [1]. In standard explicit prediction, the 

uvm reg predictor receives transactions from the monitor’s analysis port, translates them using an adapter, and internally in-vokes the register’s predict() method. Alternatively, for cus-tom backdoor mirroring, the testbench can bypass standard pre-diction blocks by calling the predict() method directly: 

> mr ral block.MR reg[addr].predict(payload, .kind(UVM PREDICT DIRECT));

This combination of a synchronized MR task API and dy-namic MR-RAL mirroring ensures that check monitors and UVM scoreboards can query the exact state of the DRAM VIP at any moment. To maintain state alignment during hardware-driven asynchronous or system resets—which restore default register values without issuing bus transactions—the MR-RAL model is bound to the system reset signal. Upon reset assertion, the passive predictor triggers a reset of the RAL block, ensur-ing perfect state alignment is maintained across power cycles. Because these backdoor updates occur in zero simulation time, false out-of-sync checker flags are entirely eliminated, yielding a massive improvement in verification accuracy. 

V. R E-C OMPILATION -F REE PHY I NITIALIZATION AND 

RUNTIME OVERRIDES 

To eliminate static pre-compiled configuration files and enable thorough randomized testing of the Memory Controller DUT, we developed an automated, closed-loop programmatic initial-ization flow. A standard SystemVerilog and UVM environment typically uses a Sequencer to generate transaction scenarios— such as testing boundary addresses and resets—which a Driver then maps to the DUT [1]. However, there may be cases where the DV testbench must be integrated with third-party IPs that use a separate compile or execution flow that is not inherently compatible with SystemVerilog/UVM. An example may be the usage of a third-party PHY IP, which requires a pre-compilation to generate static initialization sequences. Applying the stan-dard UVM-based randomized testing architecture to thousands of static PHY initialization variables creates a massive perfor-mance bottleneck. Utilizing the standard UVM configuration database ( uvm config db API) for run-time updates introduces significant simulation overhead because it requires costly string lookup operations for hundreds of elements [11]. Therefore, the configuration process is driven directly from within the SystemVerilog/UVM testbench using a dynamic ex-ecution sequence that completely bypasses the standard UVM configuration database for PHY initialization. First, through           

> 3IEEE D ESIGN & T EST PATEL AND MAJUMDER : A UTOMATED PRE -S ILICON VERIFICATION OF HIGH -S PEED DDR5 AND LPDDR5/6 M EMORY CONTROLLERS

UVM Parameter Randomization , high-level PHY physical fea-tures (such as training flags, impedance settings, and target clock frequencies) are randomized using standard SystemVerilog ar-chitecture constraints. Second, as illustrated in Fig. 2, during On-the-Fly File Gen-eration , the testbench writes these randomized values to a tem-porary configuration seed and uses a SystemVerilog system call ($system ) to trigger an external configuration compiler utility. To ensure file isolation during concurrent regressions on a par-allel compute cluster, the testbench appends the simulation pro-cess ID (PID) or a unique seed hash to the temporary file names, preventing race conditions and file collisions. Third, for PHY Configuration Calculation , the utility runs on-the-fly to gener-ate a uniquely isolated, vendor-compliant initialization text file. Fourth, a specialized SystemVerilog parsing function opens and reads this generated text file at runtime using standard file I/O operations ( $fopen , $fscanf ), extracting the hex register write sequence (addresses and data payloads). To guarantee execu-tion robustness, the parsing logic evaluates the return status of the $system call and validates the returned file descriptor from 

$fopen before parsing, immediately throwing a UVM error if the external utility fails or the file is unreadable. Finally, through Direct Register Programming , the testbench applies the extracted sequence directly to program the active PHY RTL/model registers. This mechanism acts similarly to a pre-runtime signal forcing mechanism, allowing specific internal register states to be initialized before simulation begins, which synchronizes initial conditions across tests and bypasses stan-dard protocol runtime overhead [11]. This closed-loop program-matic initialization bypasses static file generation entirely. Any PHY parameter or training threshold can be randomized and re-applied at run-time without requiring testbench re-compilation, representing a major efficiency improvement. 

VI. C ONCLUSION AND INDUSTRY IMPLICATIONS 

Implementing this automated parameter synchronization and dy-namic initialization framework yields substantial productivity gains in Memory Controller verification. The automated tim-ing pipeline reduces the bring-up time for new memory speed-bin configurations on the Memory Controller DUT from several days to under a few minutes subject to initial parser setup and register-map mapping configurations. By extracting JEDEC pa-rameters directly from authoritative SOMA files, semiconduc-tor teams can significantly mitigate the human error associated with manual datasheet transcription, saving countless hours pre-viously lost to debugging false protocol violations. While the current pipeline is designed around the proprietary Cadence De-nali SOMA format, the underlying parameter synchronization methodology is generalizable. To adapt this framework for Ver-ification IPs from other major vendors (such as Synopsys or Siemens), the front-end parser can be adjusted to read standard-ized XML schemas like IP-XACT [12], leaving the core cycle-conversion and register-mapping logic intact. By replacing pre-compiled static files with a dynamic system-call and runtime parsing flow, re-compilation bottlenecks are completely eliminated. This allows automated regressions to sweep hundreds of randomized physical configurations in a sin-gle run, rather than requiring engineers to manually re-compile the simulation environment for every minor impedance or tim-ing tweak. The introduction of the MR-RAL passive tracking mechanism further guarantees that the verification environment maintains perfect state synchronization with the volatile DRAM VIP in zero simulation time. Ultimately, these automated methodologies provide a highly scalable, robust blueprint that improves verification efficiency, enhances regression flexibility, and establishes a robust verifi-cation standard for high-bandwidth memory interfaces. As ex-ternal memory standards like DDR5 and LPDDR5 continue to push the physical limits of signal integrity and timing margins, removing static verification bottlenecks will be paramount for delivering custom ASICs and SoCs to market on schedule. 

REFERENCES                                                       

> [1] IEEE Standard for Universal Verification Methodology Language Ref-erence Manual , IEEE Std 1800.2-2020 (Revision of IEEE Std 1800.2-2017), Sep. 2020, doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2020.9195920. [2] Low Power Double Data Rate 6 (LPDDR6) Standard , JEDEC Standard JESD209-6, JEDEC Solid State Technology Association, Arlington, VA, USA, 2025. [3] L. Steiner, C. Sudarshan, M. Jung, D. Stoffel, and N. Wehn, “A frame-work for formal verification of DRAM controllers,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Symp. Memory Systems (MEMSYS) ,Oct. 2022, pp. 1–7, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2209.14021. [4] L. Steiner, M. Jung, M. Huonker, and N. Wehn, “Unveiling the real performance of LPDDR5 memories,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Symp. Memory Systems (MEMSYS) , Oct. 2022, Art. no. 9, pp. 1–3, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2209.14756. [5] DFI 5.1 Specification: DDR PHY Interface , DDR PHY Interface (DFI) Group, May 2021. [6] DDR5 SDRAM Standard , JEDEC Standard JESD79-5, JEDEC Solid State Technology Association, Arlington, VA, USA, 2020. [7] Low Power Double Data Rate 5 (LPDDR5) Standard , JEDEC Standard JESD209-5, JEDEC Solid State Technology Association, Arlington, VA, USA, 2019. [8] L. Steiner, M. Jung, F. S. Prado, K. Bykov, and N. Wehn, “DRAMSys4.0: An open-source simulation framework for in-depth DRAM analyses,”
> Int. J. Parallel Program. , vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 217–242, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1007/s10766-021-00723-5. [9] Y.-N. Yun, J.-B. Kim, N.-D. Kim, and B. Min, “UVM-based veri-fication of DDR4 SDRAM controller,” in Proc. IEEE Int. SoC De-sign Conf. (ISOCC) , Jeju, South Korea, Oct. 2021, pp. 305–306, doi: 10.1109/ISOCC53507.2021.9613965. [10] M. Litterick and M. Harnisch, “Advanced UVM register modeling: There’s more than one way to skin a reg,” in Proc. Design Verification Conf. (DVCon) , San Jose, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 1–11. [11] P. Marriott and M. Ronan, “Run-time configuration of a verification en-vironment: A novel use of the OVM/UVM analysis pattern,” in Proc. Design Verification Conf. (DVCon) , San Jose, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 1–8. [12] IEEE Standard for IP-XACT, Standard Structure for Packag-ing, Integrating, and Reusing IP within Tool Flows ,IEEE Std 1685-2022 (Revision of IEEE Std 1685-2014), Feb. 2023, doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2023.10044519.

Author Biographies