Title: Self-Spec Verifiable Code Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.39568v1

Published Time: Thu, 01 Oct 2026 01:59:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
Preprint 

# SELF -S PEC VERIFIABLE CODE GENERATION 

Jiaru Qian 1,4,5,6 , Yihong Dong 2, Yongmin Li 1,4,5 , Hao Zhu 1,4,5 , Bin Gu 3,4 , Ge Li 1

> 1

School of Computer Science, Peking University 

> 2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 

> 3

Beijing Institute of Control Engineering 

> 4

Beijing Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Code Large Language Models 

> 5

Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Peking University, Ministry of Education 

> 6

aiXcoder 

ABSTRACT 

Large language models (LLMs) may generate unreliable code on corner cases missed by testing, while formal verification can provide machine-checkable guar-antees. Recently, researchers have proposed several benchmarks to evaluate the capabilities of LLMs in generating formally verifiable code, where LLMs need to formulate formal specifications, generate the corresponding code, and verify its correctness. However, existing benchmarks have two key limitations: (I) They primarily evaluate specification and code generation stage-wise, with code gen-eration typically conditioned on an oracle specification. This setup overlooks whether strong stage-wise performance translates into end-to-end success. (II) They mainly focus on a single proof-oriented language and mathematically struc-tured tasks, offering limited coverage of tasks common in software development. In this paper, we introduce V ERI CODE BENCH , a benchmark for self-spec veri-fiable code generation, where the LLM relies solely on its own generated spec-ification and code throughout the entire process. VERI CODE BENCH contains 400 language-native problems across C, Java, Rust, and Python, covering prac-tical concerns in software development. We evaluate specification coverage, code validity, and joint problem-level success across four representative LLMs. We further introduce C ODE NOVA to enhance the capabilities of LLMs in self-spec verifiable code generation. CODE NOVA makes requirements explicit through constraint-guided specification and uses verifier feedback to guide targeted imple-mentation repairs. Experimental results reveal that self-generated specifications remain a major bottleneck, while providing more sophisticated specifications may not necessarily lead to higher verification success rates. C ODE NOVA substantially improves performance across all evaluation metrics, enabling Claude Sonnet 5 to achieve the strongest results under the self-spec protocol. Our code is available at 

https://github.com/JiaruQian/VeriCodeBench .

1 INTRODUCTION 

Large language models (LLMs) are widely used for code generation (Wang & Chen, 2023; Dong et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a). To assess the correctness of LLM-generated code, existing eval-uation methods primarily rely on test cases (Ryan et al., 2024; Nunez et al., 2024). However, test cases can cover only a limited portion of the input space and therefore cannot guarantee the correct-ness of code under all possible circumstances, such as rare inputs, unsafe memory states, or unusual exceptional behavior. Formal verification (Hasan & Tahar, 2015; Wang et al., 2025b) provides a potential solution by checking programs against formal specifications, thereby offering machine-checkable guarantees for all states that satisfy the specifications. With the increasing capabilities of LLMs, generating code that is formally verified by construction has emerged as a promising possi-bility (Aggarwal et al., 2024; Dougherty & Mehta, 2025). Starting from user requirements, an LLM needs to formulate formal specifications, generate the corresponding code, and verify its correctness: requirement −→ specification −→ code −→ verification .

1arXiv:2609.39568v1 [cs.SE] 30 Sep 2026 Preprint Table 1: Comparison with representative methods and benchmarks. Joint Generation indicates that a method or benchmark covers both specification and code generation. Self-Spec means that LLM relies solely on its own generated specification rather than an oracle throughout the entire process.                                                                   

> Method / Benchmark Joint Generation Self-Spec Multilingual Language Size nl2spec (Cosler et al., 2023) ×××LTL 36 AutoSpec (Wen et al., 2024) ×××C251 SpecGen (Ma et al., 2025) ×××Java 385 ClassInvGen (Sun et al., 2025) ×××C++ 9PropertyGPT (Liu et al., 2024) ×××Solidity 23 SLD-Spec (Chen et al., 2025) ×××C62 WybeCoder (Gloeckle et al., 2026) ×××Lean 360 Dafny-Synthesis (Misu et al., 2024) ✓××Dafny 153 AlgoVeri (Zhao et al., 2026) ××✓Dafny, Verus, Lean 77 CLEVER (Thakur et al., 2026) ✓××Lean 161 VERINA (Ye et al., 2026) ✓××Lean 189
> VERI CODE BENCH (ours) ✓✓✓C, Java, Rust, Python 400

We refer to this process as verifiable code generation . Heretofore, several benchmarks (Thakur et al., 2026; Ye et al., 2026; Le-Cong et al., 2025) have been proposed to evaluate the capabilities of LLMs in verifiable code generation. However, existing evaluations leave two complementary gaps. First, prevailing benchmarks decouple specification generation from downstream code generation and verification. They then simply combine results from these stages to assess the model’s capabil-ity for ”end-to-end” verifiable code generation. Such stage-wise protocols are useful for diagnosing individual capabilities, but their combination does not indicate the end-to-end capability. Crucially, these stages are interdependent . Errors or design choices in a generated specification can alter the difficulty and even the objective of downstream code generation. Conversely, a more complete specification may impose stronger proof obligations and reduce verification success. Consequently, strong specification generation and oracle-spec code generation do not necessarily imply strong end-to-end performance. Evaluating this interaction requires propagating the model-generated specifi-cation through the remainder of the pipeline and measuring the resulting joint success. Second, existing methods and benchmarks are concentrated in a single formal ecosystem, often using proof-oriented languages and mathematically structured tasks. Retrofitting an existing bench-mark can instantiate our self-spec protocol, but doing so would still inherit its task distribution, formal language, and verification ecosystem. Such benchmarks enable careful study of proof syn-thesis, but provide limited exposure to the programming abstractions and failure modes encountered in software development (e.g., pointer validity and frame conditions in C, object mutation and ex-ceptions in Java). We need a common evaluation shape that is end-to-end by construction while remaining faithful to each language and verification toolchain. To address the aforementioned gaps, we introduce V ERI CODE BENCH , a multilingual benchmark centered on self-spec verifiable code generation where the LLM relies solely on its own generated artifacts throughout the entire process. V ERI CODE BENCH comprises 400 language-native problems across four developer-facing languages (C, Java, Rust, and Python) paired with their native verifi-cation ecosystems. We separately evaluate whether the generated specification covers requirement-level obligations and whether the resulting code verifies against that exact specification. Their con-junction defines problem-level success. The evaluation process is fully automated and deterministic. VERI CODE BENCH reports specification coverage, code validity, and joint problem-level success. We additionally evaluate stage-wise settings to quantify the performance gap between oracle-guided and self-spec generation. Moreover, the multilingual design of V ERI CODE BENCH serves to broaden coverage to developer-facing programming models and practical software concerns that arise in real-world software development. The four language tracks preserve language-specific syntax, seman-tics, and proof obligations, exposing models to distinct challenges. The benchmark also motivates a practical approach to improving verifiable code generation. We in-troduce C ODE NOVA 1, an end-to-end approach to verifiable code generation from natural-language requirements. CODE NOVA combines requirement formalization, code generation, and verifier-guided repair in a unified generation pipeline. First, C ODE NOVA extracts atomic behavioral and 

> 1NOVA stands for Natural-language Objectives to Verified Artifacts.

2Preprint safety constraints from the requirement, translates them into the target specification language, and self-checks the resulting specification for requirement coverage. The pipeline then generates an im-plementation conditioned on this specification. Then, C ODE NOVA uses verifier feedback to analyze unsatisfied proof obligations, generate focused repair candidates, and check them with the native verifier. Overall, C ODE NOVA addresses requirement formalization and iterative implementation refinement to improve verifiable code generation under the self-spec protocol. Our main contributions are three-fold: • We present V ERI CODE BENCH , a 400-problem benchmark covering programming abstrac-tions and verification challenges common in software development. Its multilingual tracks use native verification toolchains and capture language-specific concerns. • We define self-spec verifiable code generation, preserving the generated specification through code generation, repair, and verification. We evaluate the whole pipeline with separate specification-adequacy and code-validity measurements. • We introduce C ODE NOVA , an end-to-end generation approach combining constraint-guided specification with verifier-guided candidate repair. Experimental results demon-strate the effectiveness of C ODE NOVA .

2 RELATED WORK 

2.1 BENCHMARKS FOR FORMAL REASONING AND VERIFICATION 

Benchmarks for formal reasoning address different parts of the path from informal intent to machine-checked correctness. MiniF2F (Zheng et al., 2021) evaluates theorem proving on competition-level mathematics across multiple formal systems, while ProofNet (Azerbayev et al., 2023) pairs under-graduate mathematics problems with informal proofs and Lean statements to support both autofor-malization and formal proving. These benchmarks test mathematical reasoning but do not center on synthesizing executable programs with state and memory obligations. FormalBench (Le-Cong et al., 2025) evaluates specification inference for existing programs, while AlgoVeri (Zhao et al., 2026) aligns classical algorithms across Dafny, Verus, and Lean under equiv-alent functional contracts. CLEVER (Thakur et al., 2026) separates specification generation, equiv-alence checking, implementation synthesis, and correctness proofs on Lean-adapted HumanEval problems. VERINA (Ye et al., 2026) supports generation of code, specifications, and proofs on cu-rated Lean tasks. However, these benchmarks primarily evaluate individual stages of the verifiable code generation pipeline rather than the model’s ability to autonomously complete the full pro-cess. Their application scenarios are also relatively narrow and do not fully reflect the abstractions and failure modes of real-world software development. VERI CODE BENCH addresses these gaps with a self-spec setting, where the model relies solely on its own generated specification and code throughout the full verifiable code generation pipeline. Moreover, V ERI CODE BENCH contains 400 language-native tasks across C, Java, Rust, and Python, covering common programming scenarios and language-specific verification challenges. 2.2 LLM-A SSISTED FORMAL VERIFICATION 

LLMs have been applied to several tasks in formal verification, including specification generation, program synthesis, and proof generation. Work in Dafny, Why3, Lean, and related systems (Baksys et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2021; Azerbayev et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023) has explored LLM prompt-ing, proof search, and verifier-guided repair to produce machine-checked programs or proofs. Re-cent efforts (Wen et al., 2024; Ma et al., 2025; Le-Cong et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025) also target developer-facing verification ecosystems, including ACSL/Frama-C, JML/OpenJML, and Verus, using verifier feedback to refine specifications, implementations, or proof annotations. However, most prevailing systems only focus on individual stages of the verifiable code generation pipeline, without integrating these stages into a unified workflow. Our C ODE NOVA combines requirement formalization, code generation, and verifier-guided repair in a unified generation pipeline, improv-ing performance across the full verifiable code generation process. 3Preprint (I) VeriCodeBench: Self-Spec Multilingual Benchmark    

> Natural-Language Requirement Verifier LLM LLM Code Formal Specification
> Specification needs to fully cover requirements
> Based on self-generated specification
> Code needs to be verified on corresponding specification
> v
> 400 Language Native Problems
> C
> 100 Problems
> ACSL
> Frama-C/WP
> Pointers & Arrays Memory Safety Frame Conditions Aliasing
> v
> Java
> 100 Problems
> JML
> OpenJML ESC
> Objects & Arrays Nullability Mutation Exception
> v
> Rust
> 100 Problems
> Verus
> Verus Verifier
> Ownership Borrowing Vectors & Slices Panic Freedom
> v
> Python
> 100 Problems
> Nagini
> Nagini Verifier
> Lists & Dictionaries Optional / None Permissions Exception Freedom

(II) CodeNova: Constraint-Guided Generation and Repair A. Constraint-Guided Specification   

> Natural-Language Requirement Extract Atomic Behavior
> Input Domain Output Behavior State Change ······
> Self-Check Refine Generate Formal Specifications

B. Verifier-Guided Candidate Repair    

> Self-Generated Formal Specifications Code Generation Verifier If Failure Proof obligations Verifier Diagonostics Repair Planning
> Plan Candidate 1 Plan Candidate 3 Plan Candidate 2
> Sequential Verification
> If Success Verified Implementation If Failure Evaluation Pipeline

Figure 1: Overview of V ERI CODE BENCH and C ODE NOVA . Left: VERI CODE BENCH evaluates the self-spec pipeline by jointly measuring whether the generated specification covers the requirement and whether the generated code verifies against that same specification, across 400 language-native problems. Right: CODE NOVA combines Constraint-Guided Specification with Verifier-Guided Candidate Repair to generate verified code under a self-generated specification. 

3 SELF -S PEC VERIFIABLE CODE GENERATION 

3.1 PROBLEM FORMULATION 

Let ℓ denote a programming-language and verification-toolchain track (e.g., C with ACSL and Frama-C/WP). A benchmark instance is a tuple 

xℓi = ( rℓi , h ℓi , G ℓi , c ⋆,ℓ i , V ℓ), (1) where rℓi is a natural-language requirement, hℓi is the provided function signature and language context, Gℓi is a curated set of target specification obligations, c⋆,ℓ i is a verifier-accepted reference implementation, and V ℓ is the language-native verifier. The reference specification and implemen-tation define and validate the benchmark instance; neither is exposed to the model. Given only (rℓi , h ℓi ), a system first generates a language-specific specification 

ˆsℓi = F ℓ

spec (rℓi , h ℓi ), (2) and then generates an implementation conditioned on that specification, 

ˆcℓi = F ℓ

code (rℓi , h ℓi , ˆsℓi ). (3) The resulting task is therefore not two independent predictions, but the coupled computation 

(rℓi , h ℓi ) −→ ˆsℓi −→ ˆcℓi −→ V ℓ(ˆ cℓi , ˆsℓi ). (4) This dependency is essential: the specification is both a prediction whose semantic adequacy must be assessed and an intermediate artifact that constrains downstream code generation. 3.2 VERI CODE BENCH 

VERI CODE BENCH operationalizes the task defined above through three complementary design choices. First, its self-spec evaluation protocol requires the model to rely exclusively on its own gen-erated specifications throughout code generation, repair, and verification, without access to oracle specifications. Second, it assesses specification adequacy and code validity separately. Specification adequacy is scored by a fully automated, deterministic procedure, without LLM-based judging or subjective human assessment. Joint success requires both full coverage of curated requirement-level obligations and verifier acceptance under the generated specification for the same problem. Third, 4Preprint it comprises four language-native tracks with 400 problems, evenly distributed across C, Java, Rust, and Python. The tracks share this evaluation protocol while retaining distinct programming abstrac-tions, specification languages, and verification toolchains. Together, these choices enable end-to-end evaluation of whether models can faithfully formalize requirements and produce implementations that verify against their own specifications across diverse programming settings. 3.2.1 SELF -S PEC EVALUATION 

We call a pipeline self-spec when the specification generated in Equation 2 is the mandatory spec-ification supplied in Equation 3. The pipeline may add implementation-level proof annotations or repair the function body. This is the primary evaluation setting in V ERI CODE BENCH . It reflects the information boundary of autonomous use: after receiving a natural-language request, the sys-tem cannot assume access to a human-written formalization that corrects its own interpretation. It also prevents an oracle specification from masking error propagation. For example, code may verify against a generated specification that omits an important behavior, while a specification that excludes valid inputs may make verification artificially easy. Both outcomes are failures of the end-to-end task even when the verifier accepts the implementation. Moreover, we also conduct stage-wise diagnostic evaluation as a secondary analysis. We replace ˆsℓi in Equation 3 with the curated oracle specification 

s⋆,ℓ i . This controlled setting estimates code-generation ability when specification error is removed and helps attribute the gap between oracle and self-spec performance. 3.2.2 TWO INDEPENDENT CORRECTNESS CONDITION 

Verifier acceptance establishes that code satisfies a specification, not that the specification faithfully captures the requirement. We therefore evaluate two conditions separately. First, specification ade-quacy compares the generated specification ˆsℓi with the manually curated, requirement-level target set Gℓi = {gℓi, 1, . . . , g ℓi,M i }. This comparison uses the Constraint Entailment Framework (CEF), which combines fixed, language-specific normalization and matching rules with SMT-based entail-ment checks. Given the curated targets and a generated specification, adequacy scoring is fully automated and deterministic: it requires neither LLM calls nor human adjudication. A generated specification may split, merge, or restructure target clauses, so CEF tests each target against conjunctions of compatible generated clauses. For a nonempty subset U of normalized clauses, write Φ( U ) = V 

> ˆs∈U

ˆs. Coverage uses the entailment direction below: 

Covered( gℓi,m ) = 



1, ∃U : gℓi,m |= Φ( U ), gℓi,m is a precondition ,

1, ∃U : Φ( U ) |= gℓi,m , gℓi,m is a post-, frame-, or exceptional condition ,

0, otherwise .

(5) The reversed direction for preconditions prevents credit for an unnecessarily restrictive domain; guarantees must imply the target behavior. CEF returns the fraction of curated targets with a witness, 

Aℓi = 1

MiMiX

> m=1

Covered( gℓi,m ). (6) The denominator Mi is fixed, so missing, unparsable, or unsupported specifications receive zero credit for affected targets. Search and entailment implementation details appear in Appendix A.3. Second, code validity asks whether the language-native verifier accepts the generated implementa-tion against the exact generated specification ( ⊮ denotes the indicator function): 

Cℓi = ⊮V ℓ(ˆ cℓi , ˆsℓi ) = valid  . (7) Syntax errors, failed proof obligations, verifier errors, and timeouts are not counted as valid. The primary problem-level measure requires both conditions to hold for the same benchmark instance: 

Jℓi = ⊮Cℓi = 1 ∧ Aℓi = 1  . (8) Thus, joint success requires a verifier-accepted implementation and full coverage of the target re-quirement on the same problem. VERI CODE BENCH reports mean specification coverage, code-validity rate, and joint-success. This metric suite distinguishes an implementation failure from a specification failure and rejects verification success obtained under a vacuous specification. 5Preprint 3.2.3 FOUR LANGUAGE TRACKS 

Table 2: The four language-native tracks in V ERI CODE BENCH . Each track contains 100 problems.                                  

> Language Specification Verifier Size Native coverage CACSL Frama-C/WP 100 Pointers and aliasing, arrays and slices, loops, byte/string buffers, structs, frame conditions, and bounded C arithmetic Java JML OpenJML ESC 100 Arrays, scalar and Boolean APIs, strings, nullability, ob-ject invariants, object/field frames, mutation, and excep-tional behavior Rust Verus Verus 100 Scalar arithmetic, Option /Result , vectors and slices, ownership and borrowing, unique mutation, bounds, and panic freedom Python Nagini specifications Nagini 100 Typed scalar functions, Optional /None , lists and dic-tionaries, predicate permissions, mutation, and excep-tion freedom

C/ACSL/Frama-C. The C track covers 13 categories, including pointer and pointer-block manipu-lation, mutable and immutable arrays, array slices, loops, byte and string buffers, records, and scalar arithmetic. Specifications use ACSL requires , ensures , and assigns clauses (Baudin et al., 2008) , and implementations are checked with Frama-C’s weakest-precondition plugin . The track makes memory-side conditions explicit: functional behavior interacts with pointer validity, separa-tion, buffer bounds, frame conditions, loop invariants, and machine-integer safety. These obligations make C substantially different from a purely algorithmic synthesis benchmark. 

Java/JML/OpenJML. The Java track spans 15 categories centered on arrays, scalar arithmetic, Boolean logic, strings and characters, mutation, nullability, object state, and exceptions. JML spec-ifications (Burdy et al., 2005) are checked by OpenJML (Cok, 2011) in extended static checking mode. Problems involving helper classes additionally provide a fixed type context that declares avail-able fields, visibility, and class invariants. This context prevents the model from inventing a different object representation without revealing the curated JML specification. The track therefore tests both functional postconditions and Java-specific behavioral specifications such as assignable , object invariants, and exceptional outcomes. 

Rust/Verus. The Rust track contains scalar-arithmetic, Option /Result , immutable-vector, vector-mutation, and ownership/slice families, together with extended variants of each family. Verus specifications (Lattuada et al., 2023) are attached to Rust function signatures through requires 

and ensures clauses. The problems emphasize safe-Rust functional correctness while retaining verification challenges not present in ordinary compilation: view-based reasoning about vectors and slices, pre/post-state relations for mutable borrows, bounds and panic freedom, and proof annota-tions for loops. In contrast to the C track, ownership and borrowing rule out broad classes of aliasing behavior but introduce their own specification vocabulary and proof obligations. 

Python/Nagini. The Python track targets the typed subset supported by Nagini (Eilers & M¨ uller, 2018). Its 12 categories cover scalar functions, Optional /None , mutable list operations, dic-tionary APIs, and exception freedom, including extended variants. specifications are expressed as executable-looking Requires(...) and Ensures(...) statements, while Nagini translates verification conditions to its underlying permission logic. Container problems therefore include predicate permissions such as list or dictionary access, and use pre-state expressions when post-conditions refer to values before mutation. This track tests whether models can produce statically verifiable specifications and implementations despite Python’s otherwise dynamic surface syntax. 3.3 CODE NOVA 

CODE NOVA combines Constraint-Guided Specification (CGS) with Verifier-Guided Candidate Re-pair (VGCR) to generate verified code under a self-generated specification. Given a requirement r

and fixed interface h, CGS produces a specification ˆs; VGCR then repairs its implementation using the native verifier V . Appendix B provides implementation details. 6Preprint 3.3.1 CONSTRAINT -G UIDED SPECIFICATION 

CGS separates requirement interpretation from formalization. It first extracts atomic behavioral and safety constraints Q = {q1, . . . , q m}, covering admissible inputs, outputs, state changes, and language-specific obligations, then translates them into a specification: 

Q = Fextract (r, h ), s(0) = Ftranslate (r, h, Q). (9) The model reviews the specification against the requirement and extracted constraints, identifying omissions and inconsistencies. Its assessment u(j) guides refinement when needed: 

u(j) = Fcheck (r, h, Q, s (j)),s(j+1) = Frefine (r, h, Q, s (j), u (j)). (10) Review stops when the model reports alignment or no remaining issues, or the review budget is exhausted; the selected specification is saved as ˆs. This self-check is a generation heuristic: Q is model-generated, and CEF independently evaluates ˆs without external hints. Auxiliary proof hints, such as loop invariants, are kept separate from the function specification and remain mutable. 3.3.2 VERIFIER -G UIDED CANDIDATE REPAIR 

The pipeline generates c0 = Fcode (r, h, ˆs) and checks V (c0, ˆs). On failure, VGCR uses verifier diagnostics dt for the current implementation ct to plan repairs and propose up to K candidates: 

Pt = Fplan (r, h, ˆs, c t, d t), (11) 

˜ct,k = Frepair (r, h, ˆs, c t, P t, f t,k ), k = 1 , . . . , K. (12) The plan Pt decomposes failures into subgoals with diagnostic evidence and repair hints, such as correcting bounds checks or strengthening loop invariants. The focus ft,k directs a candidate toward combined subgoals, an individual issue, or an alternative implementation. Candidates share the same starting code and plan within a round, and are checked sequentially as complete programs by 

V . VGCR returns the first verifier-accepted candidate. If none passes, the last candidate submitted to 

V and its diagnostics seed the next round; candidates rejected by language-subset prechecks do not replace the current code. If the repair budget is exhausted without verifier acceptance, the instance is recorded as a failure. By translating verifier diagnostics into explicit repair subgoals, VGCR guides changes to executable code and local proof annotations. Exploring candidates with different repair focuses provides alternative ways to resolve verification failures, while checking each candidate as a complete program validates whether the proposed changes satisfy the proof obligations. 

4 EXPERIMENTS 

In this section, we conduct thorough evaluations of frontier LLMs and C ODE NOVA on V ERI -CODE BENCH . We organize the evaluation around four research questions. RQ1 (Section 4.2): 

How well do current LLMs and C ODE NOVA perform on end-to-end verified code generation un-der the self-spec protocol? RQ2 (Section 4.3): How does the source of the specification affect downstream code generation? RQ3 (Appendix C): How does joint success scale with the sampling budget, as measured by pass@ k? RQ4 (Appendix D): What do representative case studies reveal about the strengths and limitations in end-to-end verified code generation? 4.1 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

Models and Inference Configuration. We evaluate DeepSeek V3.2, Kimi-K2.7-Code, Qwen3.6-plus, and Claude-Sonnet-5 on all 400 problems. Each pipeline uses the same base LLM for spec-ification generation, code generation, and any subsequent review or repair. We also evaluate the performance with different sampling budgets on DeepSeek V4.1 Flash. 

Implementation Details. We verify each implementation using the native verification toolchain for its respective language: Frama-C/WP for C, OpenJML for Java, Verus for Rust, and Nagini for Python. Code validity requires verifier acceptance under the specification supplied to generation. Syntax or type errors, unproved obligations, verifier errors, and timeouts count as failures. The 7Preprint Table 3: Results on V ERI CODE BENCH , with 100 problems per language. Joint denotes joint-success counts; Req. cov. represents mean requirement coverage; Valid means code-valid counts. Direct and VGCR share the same generated specifications, as do CGS and C ODE NOVA . Joint suc-cess requires both complete requirement coverage and verifier acceptance on the same problem. 

Bold values denote the best result. Second best results are underlined.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

> Base LLM Method C (100) Java (100) Rust (100) Python (100) Joint Req. cov. Valid Joint Req. cov. Valid Joint Req. cov. Valid Joint Req. cov. Valid DeepSeek V3.2 Direct 80.3247 34 30 0.7113 76 33 0.5522 44 46 0.8267 68 +VGCR 11 0.3247 60 31 0.7113 82 45 0.5522 68 46 0.8267 71 +CGS 12 0.5215 30 36 0.7810 56 30 0.5572 49 51 0.8593 65 CODE NOVA 17 0.5215 54 38 0.7810 66 35 0.5572 58 52 0.8593 68 Kimi-K2.7-Code Direct 16 0.5856 68 56 0.8250 77 57 0.6965 91 76 0.9327 86 +VGCR 17 0.5856 86 59 0.8250 86 57 0.6965 92 76 0.9327 86 +CGS 21 0.6529 71 55 0.8265 68 43 0.7562 60 73 0.9380 82 CODE NOVA 22 0.6529 86 61 0.8265 79 43 0.7562 60 73 0.9380 82 Qwen3.6-plus Direct 13 0.4480 50 37 0.6522 83 38 0.6667 56 54 0.8940 65 +VGCR 17 0.4480 64 37 0.6522 91 50 0.6667 76 55 0.8940 66 +CGS 18 0.6552 39 46 0.7958 82 42 0.7164 54 61 0.9148 71 CODE NOVA 24 0.6552 66 46 0.7958 88 49 0.7164 69 64 0.9148 74 Claude-Sonnet-5 Direct 30 0.6878 73 65 0.9060 90 68 0.8060 96 76 0.9430 79 +VGCR 33 0.6878 80 71 0.9060 99 68 0.8060 98 76 0.9430 79 +CGS 23 0.7157 56 63 0.9097 82 71 0.8507 94 85 0.9673 90
> CODE NOVA 31 0.7157 77 73 0.9097 97 73 0.8507 97 85 0.9673 90

primary protocol is self-spec. We compare four configurations: Direct generates a specification and one implementation without repair; CGS replaces direct specification generation with Constraint-Guided Specification; VGCR adds Verifier-Guided Candidate Repair to Direct; and CODE NOVA 

combines CGS and VGCR. Implementation details are described in Appendix B.3. We report mean per-problem requirement coverage (Req. cov.), the number of verifier-accepted implementations (Valid), and the number that additionally achieve complete requirement coverage (Joint), following Section 3.1. Each track contains 100 problems, so Valid and Joint counts also equal percentage rates. 4.2 END -TO -E ND SELF -S PEC PERFORMANCE 

We evaluate four LLMs under the four configurations in Section 4.1 on all 400 problems using the self-spec protocol. Results are shown in Table 3. Under direct setting, code validity averages 71.0% across the 16 model–language settings, but joint success reaches only 44.1%. Under Direct setting, Claude-Sonnet-5 performs the best, achievint 60.3% joint success in average across the four tracks. Thus, producing implementations that both verify and fully cover the requirements remains challenging even for the strongest evaluated model. 

CGS improves coverage but may increase downstream difficulty. CGS improves requirement coverage in all 16 settings, raising the mean from 0.7162 to 0.7761 and indicating more complete formalization of the target obligations. Yet code validity declines in several settings. For Kimi-K2.7-Code on Rust, coverage rises from 0.6965 to 0.7562 while valid implementations drop from 91 to 60. This pattern is consistent with more demanding specifications making implementation and proof generation harder. Unnecessary complexity or overly restrictive conditions may further compound the difficulty. Coverage alone does not establish specification complexity or rule out over-constraint. Despite this trade-off, CGS improves aggregate joint success from 44.1% to 45.6% in average. 

VGCR improves verification under both direct and CGS settings. VGCR uses verifier feed-back to repair code and implementation-level proof annotations, including loop invariants. Added to Direct, it raises code validity and joint success significantly. VGCR also helps implement CGS-generated specifications: combining two stages raises validity from 65.6% to 75.7% and joint suc-cess from 45.6% to 49.1%. Thus, C ODE NOVA achieves the best aggregate joint success among the four configurations, with Claude-Sonnet-5 reaching 65.5% across tracks. These gains support the complementarity of specification guidance and verifier-guided repair. 

Specification adequacy limits the end-to-end pipeline. Downstream improvements remain bounded by the frozen specification. For DeepSeek V3.2 on C, VGCR increases valid implemen-tations from 34 to 60, but joint successes rise from 8 to only 11. Because generation, verification, 8Preprint Table 4: Code validity with self-generated versus oracle specifications. Self uses the Direct or CGS specification from Table 3; Oracle supplies a curated function specification. Both settings require the model to generate code and implementation-level proof annotations.                                                                                 

> Base LLM Method C (100) Java (100) Rust (100) Python (100) Self Oracle Self Oracle Self Oracle Self Oracle DeepSeek V3.2 Direct 34 69 ↑25 76 94 ↑18 44 70 ↑26 68 90 ↑22
> CODE NOVA 54 69 ↑15 66 99 ↑33 58 91 ↑33 68 93 ↑25
> Kimi-K2.7-Code Direct 68 70 ↑277 96 ↑19 91 91 −86 92 ↑6
> CODE NOVA 86 89 ↑379 100 ↑21 60 93 ↑33 82 95 ↑13
> Qwen3.6-plus Direct 50 86 ↑36 83 93 ↑10 56 74 ↑18 65 90 ↑25
> CODE NOVA 66 92 ↑26 88 99 ↑11 69 80 ↑11 74 92 ↑18
> Claude-Sonnet-5 Direct 73 87 ↑14 90 96 ↑696 98 ↑279 95 ↑16
> CODE NOVA 77 91 ↑14 97 100 ↑397 100 ↑390 100 ↑10

Joint Success of DeepSeek-v4.1-Flash 

C Java Rust Python Pass@k Sampling Budget k    

> Direct + CGS + VGCR CodeNova

Figure 2: Pass@ k joint-success curves across the four language tracks. The panels use language-specific y-axis ranges to improve visual resolution. Detailed analysis are provided in Appendix C. and repair cannot restore requirement coverage when the specification omits an obligation. Even verifier-accepted code cannot achieve joint success without an adequate initial specification. 4.3 ERROR PROPAGATION AND ORACLE -S PEC DIAGNOSTIC 

We compare code generation conditioned on the model’s own specification ( Self ) with code gener-ation conditioned on a curated oracle function specification ( Oracle ). The oracle supplies interface-level obligations, including applicable preconditions, postconditions, and frame conditions; the model must still generate the implementation and its implementation-level proof annotations, such as loop invariants. We evaluate Direct and C ODE NOVA in both settings. The reported metric is code validity under the respective supplied specification, not self-spec joint success. 

Oracle specifications reveal substantial hidden difficulty in self-spec generation. Table 4 shows that oracle specifications improve code validity in nearly every comparison. With oracle specifica-tions, strong models such as Claude-Sonnet-5 achieve consistently high verification success, indi-cating that downstream code generation and proof synthesis are considerably more capable when the specification is reliable. This explains why existing benchmarks that evaluate oracle-spec code generation separately and combine it with specification generation performance may provide overly optimistic estimates of end-to-end verified code generation. 

Code generation performance is sensitive to which specification it receives. Even with VGCR, CODE NOVA using self-generated specifications remains 12.4 percentage points lower than the oracle setting in aggregate validity. This gap demonstrates that improving downstream repair alone cannot fully eliminate the challenges introduced by self-spec generation. However, the gap should not be interpreted as a direct measurement of specification errors, because replacing a self-generated specification with an oracle specification changes both the information available to the model and the verification obligations. Conversely, a small oracle gap does not necessarily imply adequate specifications. For example, Kimi-K2.7-Code on Rust achieves identical Direct validity under Self and Oracle specifications, while its self-spec joint success remains substantially lower. These results 9Preprint highlight that specification quality and verifier acceptance capture different failure modes, and both are necessary for reliable end-to-end verified code generation. Cases can be found in Appendix D.4. 

5 CONCLUSION 

We introduced V ERI CODE BENCH , a self-spec multilingual benchmark of 400 problems across C, Java, Rust, and Python. By jointly assessing requirement coverage and native verifier acceptance, the benchmark exposes failures that verification under a generated specification alone can miss. Our evaluation shows that specification quality strongly affects downstream verification and remains a bottleneck for end-to-end success. CODE NOVA combines constraint-guided specification with verifier-guided candidate repair to improve aggregate joint success, while its remaining failures highlight the limits of repair under an inadequate specification. These findings motivate methods that advance faithful requirement formalization alongside implementation and proof generation, and evaluation that preserves their dependencies throughout the pipeline. 

REFERENCES 

Pranjal Aggarwal, Bryan Parno, and Sean Welleck. Alphaverus: Bootstrapping formally ver-ified code generation through self-improving translation and treefinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06176 , 2024. Zhangir Azerbayev, Bartosz Piotrowski, Hailey Schoelkopf, Edward W Ayers, Dragomir Radev, and Jeremy Avigad. Proofnet: Autoformalizing and formally proving undergraduate-level mathemat-ics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12433 , 2023. Mantas Baksys, Stefan Zetzsche, Olivier Bouissou, and Sean B Holden. Minif2f-dafny: Llm-guided mathematical theorem proving via auto-active verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10187 ,2025. Patrick Baudin, Jean-Christophe Filliˆ atre, Claude March´ e, Benjamin Monate, Yannick Moy, and Virgile Prevosto. Acsl: Ansi c specification language. CEA-LIST, Saclay, France, Tech. Rep. v1 ,2:79, 2008. Lilian Burdy, Yoonsik Cheon, David R Cok, Michael D Ernst, Joseph R Kiniry, Gary T Leavens, K Rustan M Leino, and Erik Poll. An overview of jml tools and applications. International journal on software tools for technology transfer , 7(3):212–232, 2005. Zehan Chen, Long Zhang, Zhiwei Zhang, JingJing Zhang, Ruoyu Zhou, Yulong Shen, JianFeng Ma, and Lin Yang. Sld-spec: enhancement llm-assisted specification generation for complex loop functions via program slicing and logical deletion. arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2509, 2025. David R Cok. Openjml: Jml for java 7 by extending openjdk. In NASA Formal Methods Symposium ,pp. 472–479. Springer, 2011. Matthias Cosler, Christopher Hahn, Daniel Mendoza, Frederik Schmitt, and Caroline Trippel. nl2spec: Interactively translating unstructured natural language to temporal logics with large language models. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification , pp. 383–396. Springer, 2023. Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Jiaru Qian, Tian Wang, Kechi Zhang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. A survey on code generation with llm-based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.00083 , 2025. Quinn Dougherty and Ronak Mehta. Proving the coding interview: A benchmark for formally verified code generation. In 2025 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Large Language Models for Code (LLM4Code) , pp. 72–79. IEEE, 2025. Marco Eilers and Peter M¨ uller. Nagini: a static verifier for python. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification , pp. 596–603. Springer, 2018. Fabian Gloeckle, Mantas Baksys, Darius Feher, Kunhao Zheng, Amaury Hayat, Sean B Holden, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Peter O’Hearn. Wybecoder: Verified imperative code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.29088 , 2026. 10 Preprint Osman Hasan and Sofiene Tahar. Formal verification methods. In Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology, Third Edition , pp. 7162–7170. IGI Global Scientific Publishing, 2015. Andrea Lattuada, Travis Hance, Chanhee Cho, Matthias Brun, Isitha Subasinghe, Yi Zhou, Jon Howell, Bryan Parno, and Chris Hawblitzel. Verus: Verifying rust programs using linear ghost types. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 7(OOPSLA1):286–315, 2023. Thanh Le-Cong, Bach Le, and Toby Murray. Can llms reason about program semantics? a compre-hensive evaluation of llms on formal specification inference. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 21991– 22014, 2025. Ye Liu, Yue Xue, Daoyuan Wu, Yuqiang Sun, Yi Li, Miaolei Shi, and Yang Liu. Propertygpt: Llm-driven formal verification of smart contracts through retrieval-augmented property generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02580 , 2024. Lezhi Ma, Shangqing Liu, Yi Li, Xiaofei Xie, and Lei Bu. Specgen: Automated generation of formal program specifications via large language models. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , pp. 16–28. IEEE, 2025. Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Cristina V Lopes, Iris Ma, and James Noble. Towards ai-assisted synthesis of verified dafny methods. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , 1(FSE):812–835, 2024. Ana Nunez, Nafis Tanveer Islam, Sumit Kumar Jha, and Peyman Najafirad. Autosafecoder: A multi-agent framework for securing llm code generation through static analysis and fuzz testing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10737 , 2024. Gabriel Ryan, Siddhartha Jain, Mingyue Shang, Shiqi Wang, Xiaofei Ma, Murali Krishna Ra-manathan, and Baishakhi Ray. Code-aware prompting: A study of coverage-guided test gen-eration in regression setting using llm. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , 1 (FSE):951–971, 2024. Chuyue Sun, Viraj Agashe, Saikat Chakraborty, Jubi Taneja, Clark Barrett, David Dill, Xiaokang Qiu, and Shuvendu K Lahiri. Classinvgen: Class invariant synthesis using large language models. In International Symposium on AI Verification , pp. 64–96. Springer, 2025. Amitayush Thakur, Jasper Lee, George Tsoukalas, Meghana Sistla, Matthew Zhao, Stefan Zetzsche, Greg Durrett, Yisong Yue, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Clever: A curated benchmark for formally verified code generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38, 2026. Evan Wang, Federico Cassano, Catherine Wu, Yunfeng Bai, William Song, Vaskar Nath, Ziwen Han, Sean Hendryx, Summer Yue, and Hugh Zhang. Planning in natural language improves llm search for code generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pp. 2432–2478, 2025a. Jianxun Wang and Yixiang Chen. A review on code generation with llms: Application and eval-uation. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Medical Artificial Intelligence (MedAI) , pp. 284–289. IEEE, 2023. Weiqi Wang, Marie Farrell, Lucas C Cordeiro, and Liping Zhao. Supporting software formal ver-ification with large language models: An experimental study. In 2025 IEEE 33rd International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) , pp. 423–431. IEEE, 2025b. Cheng Wen, Jialun Cao, Jie Su, Zhiwu Xu, Shengchao Qin, Mengda He, Haokun Li, Shing-Chi Cheung, and Cong Tian. Enchanting program specification synthesis by large language models using static analysis and program verification. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification , pp. 302–328. Springer, 2024. Valentina Wu, Alexandra Mendes, and Alexandre Abreu. Specification-guided repair of arithmetic errors in dafny programs using llms. In International Conference on Software Engineering and Formal Methods , pp. 261–278. Springer, 2025. 11 Preprint Kaiyu Yang, Aidan Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan J Prenger, and Animashree Anandkumar. Leandojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:21573– 21612, 2023. Zhe Ye, Zhengxu Yan, Jingxuan He, Timothe Kasriel, Kaiyu Yang, and Dawn Song. Verina: Bench-marking verifiable code generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,volume 2026, pp. 38933–38972, 2026. Haoyu Zhao, Ziran Yang, Jiawei Li, Deyuan He, Zenan Li, Chi Jin, Venugopal V Veeravalli, Aarti Gupta, and Sanjeev Arora. Algoveri: An aligned benchmark for verified code generation on classical algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09464 , 2026. Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu. Minif2f: a cross-system benchmark for formal olympiad-level mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00110 , 2021. 

A IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF VERI CODE BENCH 

A.1 DATASET CONSTRUCTION AND QUALITY CONTROL 

We construct every track in four stages. First, each problem is assigned a concise natural-language requirement and a fixed language-level signature. The signature removes irrelevant interface search while leaving behavioral formalization to the model. When a task depends on auxiliary declarations, such as a Java record-like class, the input also includes the minimal type context needed to compile and verify the target method. The primary protocol exposes only the requirement, signature, and such public context; target clauses and reference code remain hidden. Second, we manually curate a set of atomic target obligations from the intended behavior. Each target record stores a stable identifier, clause type, formal expression, natural-language gloss, and provenance. Depending on the track, clause types include preconditions, postconditions, frame or assignability conditions, and exceptional behavior. The target set is not obtained by blindly extract-ing every annotation from a reference file. Reference implementations often contain proof-oriented conditions—for example pointer-validity facts, permission predicates, overflow guards, or helper invariants—that may be necessary for a particular proof but are not always part of the requirement’s semantic target. Curators include such conditions only when they are part of the benchmark’s in-tended specification. Conversely, when a concise requirement leaves a verification-relevant detail implicit, the reference specification is used to resolve the instance’s operational meaning. The re-leased target clauses make these decisions explicit and auditable. Third, every instance is paired with a manually constructed implementation and full native specifica-tion. Reference programs may contain loop invariants, frame annotations, ownership/view facts, or permission assertions required by their respective verifier. They are checked with the same verifier family used to score generated artifacts. This serves two purposes: it establishes that the task is realizable under the fixed interface, and it validates the interaction between the curated behavioral targets and the language-specific verification environment. The reference implementation is never used as a candidate answer in model evaluation. Finally, automated dataset checks validate identifier alignment, paths, signatures, clause schemas, and target counts between the requirement and ground-truth manifests. The current release contains exactly 100 requirements and 100 corresponding target records in each track. Reference suites are run in toolchain-specific containers to control verifier and solver dependencies. We retain older subsets separately for reproducibility, but all results in this paper use the 100-problem manifests. A.2 DESIGN PRINCIPLES 

The benchmark is organized around three principles. 

Dependency fidelity. The benchmark preserves the causal dependency of autonomous generation. A model first produces a specification and must then implement the program under that same spec-ification. The specification is treated as a frozen intermediate artifact during code generation and 12 Preprint verifier-guided repair. This prevents a system from obtaining an easier proof by silently deleting a postcondition, strengthening a precondition, or substituting the benchmark’s target specification. Consequently, the primary result captures error propagation from requirement interpretation to spec-ification and finally to verified implementation. 

Language-native verification. Single-ecosystem benchmarks provide focused measurements within one formal setting; our multilingual design adds complementary breadth across programming models and verifier semantics. Rather than translating one abstract task set into several syntaxes, we evaluate the abstractions developers actually encounter in each ecosystem. The four tracks share the same high-level interface—requirement, specification, implementation, verifier, and coverage targets—but use language-specific problems and native specification idioms. This choice exposes difficulties such as pointer validity in C, object frames in Java, ownership-aware mutation in Rust, and permission-based container reasoning in Python. Cross-language differences should therefore be interpreted as differences between complete task–toolchain combinations, not as controlled mea-surements on parallel translations. 

Joint evaluation with diagnostic controls. Verifier acceptance and requirement alignment are recorded independently, then combined only at the problem level as defined in Equation 8. The self-spec path is the benchmark’s primary protocol. At the same time, the curated targets and reference specifications support oracle-spec and stage-wise controls that localize failures without changing the primary task. All variants use the same fixed target denominator, so a generation failure or unparsable specification cannot improve coverage by removing difficult obligations from evaluation. A.3 CONSTRAINT ENTAILMENT DETAILS 

CEF searches compatible generated clauses in increasing conjunction size, from single clauses through all nonempty subsets, and stops at the first witness. Thus one target requires at most 2N − 1

entailment checks. In our implementation, we set N = 5 and limits the maximum search attempts to 2, 000 . Each query L |= R is reduced to unsatisfiability of L ∧ ¬ R in an SMT solver after conser-vative, language-specific canonicalization. Canonicalization removes superficial differences such as parameter names and supported Boolean rewrites while preserving pre/post-state distinctions. Ex-ceptional constructs outside the shared Boolean fragment use conservative type-aware matching. The LLM is never asked to prove equivalence; coverage depends on the specification logic itself. Missing, unparsable, or unsupported specifications receive zero credit for affected targets. A.4 BENCHMARK ARTIFACTS 

VERI CODE BENCH releases both static dataset artifacts and the machinery needed to reproduce an end-to-end run. For each problem, the static release contains the requirement and category meta-data, fixed signature and optional type context, atomic ground-truth obligations, a complete refer-ence specification, and an annotated reference implementation. Track-level scripts verify reference programs and invoke the appropriate requirement-to-code pipeline. For every model run, the pipeline stores four layers of evidence: (i) the canonical generated speci-fication, including structured clauses and the exact specification text; (ii) the generated source file; (iii) the normalized verifier verdict and raw diagnostics; and (iv) the CEF and problem-level sum-mary reports. The canonical representation is language aware: ACSL and JML use source-level specification blocks, Verus stores structured signature clauses, and Nagini stores both specification statements and normalized clauses. This representation is the source of truth shared by code gener-ation, verification, and coverage scoring. The pipeline operationalizes the self-spec boundary at the artifact level. The generated specification is supplied to code generation and remains frozen during repair; only method bodies, helper proof code, and implementation-level annotations such as loop invariants may change. The verifier-facing form is language specific: ACSL and JML blocks appear above the target function, Verus clauses are rebuilt into the function signature, and Nagini statements appear at the beginning of the function body. The Java and Python adapters reinsert the canonical specification after generation and repair, while the Rust adapter derives the signature from its stored structured clauses; the C pipeline passes the same stored ACSL block to every downstream prompt. Specification-placement and enforcement 13 Preprint actions are retained in run metadata, and an explicit consistency check rejects Java source/specifi-cation mismatches. Together with raw diagnostics and fixed manifests, these artifacts make each reported failure traceable to specification generation, code generation, specification preservation, or the native verifier. 

B IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF CODE NOVA 

This section supplements the CGS and VGCR procedures in Section 3.3, including their language-specific representations, candidate scheduling, and controlled evaluation. B.1 CONSTRAINT REPRESENTATION AND SPECIFICATION REFINEMENT 

Atomic constraints. Each extracted constraint expresses a single condition in concise mathemat-ical or logical language. The structured representation groups constraints by role, including admis-sible inputs, return-value behavior, state changes, and invariants. Track-specific fields capture frame conditions and exceptional behavior in Java, mutation and panic freedom in Rust, and permissions and exception freedom in Python. The fixed signature and public context constrain extraction to the supplied interface and object representation. For example, updating one array element while preserving the others requires both an updated-value relation and an unchanged-region condition. Distinct return cases and boundary inputs should likewise remain explicit. The extracted set Q can nevertheless be incomplete; it is not the curated target set G used by CEF. 

Native translation and proof hints. Translation retains access to the original requirement and interface, distinguishes input assumptions from output guarantees, and preserves pre/post-state ref-erences for mutation. Language-specific instructions guide ACSL pointer validity and frames, JML assignability, Verus sequence views and mutable borrows, and Nagini container permissions. The specification artifact may also contain auxiliary hints for code generation, including candidate loop invariants, loop frames, and termination measures where supported. These are stored separately from the function specification because they depend on a future implementation and may change during repair. They are neither assumptions on every function call nor additional requirement-level evaluation targets. 

Review and fallback. The self-check returns a structured alignment judgment, missing con-straints, inconsistencies, and refinement hints. As in Equation 10, refinement uses those findings to revise the specification. Review ends when the model reports alignment or lists no missing or inconsistent items, or when its configured budget is reached. The adapters validate the specification representation and apply their supported-syntax checks and fallback rules before saving ˆs. Budget exhaustion does not establish alignment. Neither CEF coverage nor its entailment witnesses are available to this process. B.2 REPAIR PLANNING AND CANDIDATE SCHEDULING 

Plan structure. The verifier-derived plan contains a failure summary, subgoals, an overall repair strategy, and potential semantic risks. Each subgoal records an issue type, supporting diagnostic evidence, and a proposed implementation or annotation change. Issues can concern syntax and specification placement, postconditions, memory or permission safety, bounds and overflow, loop invariant establishment or preservation, frames, or termination. Timeouts and unclassified failures can also trigger planning. These subgoals are LLM interpretations of diagnostics, not independently proved lemmas; a failed or timed-out proof attempt is not treated as a concrete counterexample. 

Focus schedule and selection. For each plan, the focus schedule first integrates all subgoal hints, then prioritizes individual subgoals in order, and finally requests an alternative implementation if the candidate budget reaches that focus. The schedule repeats if necessary. Each candidate is generated from the same ct and Pt within a round and undergoes language-specific processing before native verification. Checking the complete program preserves interactions between subgoals: a postcon-dition repair must still satisfy memory safety, framing, and all other verifier obligations. The first accepted candidate is returned; otherwise, the last candidate submitted to the verifier becomes ct+1 .14 Preprint Precheck-rejected candidates do not replace the current implementation; if all candidates are re-jected, the round records a failure. Selection uses verifier acceptance, without an LLM score or an assumption that unproved obligations decrease monotonically. On budget exhaustion, the final implementation is retained for analysis. B.3 CONTROLLED COMPONENT EVALUATION 

Direct generates a specification and one implementation, then verifies it once. CGS changes speci-fication generation while retaining that single code attempt; VGCR adds repair under Direct’s saved specification; full C ODE NOVA combines both stages. Each repair run reuses the exact specifica-tion and initial code from its corresponding run without repair. Neither artifact is resampled, so specification coverage is identical within each pair. This isolates repair gains from specification-generation effects. Extracted constraints, self-check findings, repair plans, candidate focuses, and verifier outcomes are recorded for analysis. 

C PASS @k ANALYSIS 

To address RQ3 , we conduct evaluation on the performance with different sampling budgets. We adopt DeepSeek v4.1 Flash as the base model, measuring pass@ k performance under four configu-rations. Figure 2 highlights a central distinction between improving the specification and improving the implementation. CGS can lower the curve in some language tracks, especially at small sampling budgets, because a more sophisticated specification may also introduce additional proof obligations or a less usable proof interface. In other tracks and at larger budgets, however, CGS raises the attainable success level by making the intended behavior easier to recover. Its effect is therefore conditional rather than uniformly positive or negative. VGCR is more consistently beneficial across the curves. Verifier feedback provides a mechanism for converting additional samples into targeted repairs, so the VGCR curves generally dominate their Direct counterparts or approach the same ceiling more quickly. This effect is complemen-tary to CGS: when CGS supplies a better-aligned specification, VGCR can spend its repair budget on implementation and proof obligations rather than compensating for missing requirements. The combined C ODE NOVA curves consequently recover cases where CGS alone is harmful while retain-ing its gains where specification guidance is useful. The curves also show why pass@ 1 can understate the potential of the full pipeline. Several configu-rations continue to improve as the budget grows, with C ODE NOVA often retaining useful headroom through pass@ 5. This pattern is consistent with complementary candidate diversity: different sam-ples may discover distinct specifications, implementations, or verifier-proof annotations. At the same time, the flattening of some curves indicates that sampling cannot remove a persistent specifi-cation bottleneck or an unrealizable obligation. Language-specific verifier semantics and specifica-tion idioms further shape both the initial success rate and the rate of saturation, so pass@ k should be read as a budget-sensitivity diagnostic rather than a single ranking independent of the track. 

D CASE STUDY 

This section gives artifact-level examples of how constraint extraction and verification-guided repair affect the two components of joint success. Examples are selected from the Claude-Sonnet-5 runs. D.1 CGS CAN REPAIR MISSING BEHAVIORAL COVERAGE 

Here CGS makes the specification more explicit while preserving verifier validity, so a previously incomplete specification becomes a joint success. 

C, problem 13 (separate equal and unequal behaviors). The base specification expresses equal-ity with one biconditional and covers only 4/6 target clauses. CGS splits the two behaviors into disjoint, complete ACSL behaviors:  

> behavior all_equal:

15 Preprint                                  

> assumes \forall integer i; 0<= i<n==> a[i] == b[i]; ensures \result == 1; behavior not_equal: assumes \exists integer i; 0<= i<n&& a[i] != b[i]; ensures \result == 0; complete behaviors; disjoint behaviors;

The generated code remains valid and coverage rises to 6/6, producing a joint success. 

Rust, problem 36 (vector mutation). The base specification uses one subrange equation and covers 2/3 targets. CGS spells out both the length change and the unchanged prefix:                 

> ensures v.len() == old(v).len() -1ensures forall|i: int| 0<= i<v.len() ==> v[i] == old(v)[i]

The decomposition matches the evaluator’s independent length, changed-element, and frame targets, giving 3/3 coverage while retaining verifier acceptance. 

Python, problem 57 (complementary branch). The base specification covers only the true branch ( 1/2):    

> Ensures(Implies(flag, Result() == x))

CGS adds the missing false branch, raising coverage to 2/2:      

> Ensures(Implies(flag, Result() == x)) Ensures(Implies( not flag, Result() == y))

D.2 CGS MAY ALSO MAKE AN ALREADY -VALID PROGRAM HARDER TO PROVE 

These cases have full target coverage in both runs, but the richer specification introduces a proof obligation that the native verifier cannot discharge. 

C, problem 5 (pointer aliasing and frames). The base program verifies with coverage 2/2. CGS adds the semantically useful frame fact that the read pointer is unchanged:          

> /*@ ensures *a == \old(*a) +\old(*b); ensures *b == \old(*b); */

The implementation changes a but says nothing that excludes a and b from aliasing. Frama-C/WP proves four of five goals and times out on the new frame goal (10 seconds); the base run proves four of four. Thus CGS preserves coverage but changes code valid from true to false. 

Java, problem 16 (existential loop invariant). The base specification and implementation verify with coverage 5/5. CGS uses an existential witness in the loop invariant:                                

> /*@ loop_invariant (\exists int k; 0<= k&& k<i&& a[k] == min) || i== 0; @ loop_invariant \forall int k; 0<= k&& k<i; min <= a[k]; @*/

OpenJML cannot establish preservation of the first invariant for the generated loop. The specification remains fully covered ( 5/5), but validity is lost because the proof interface is stronger than the implementation can establish. 

Python, problem 94 (length-preservation disjunction). The base specification verifies with cov-erage 4/4. CGS adds a length case split:   

> Ensures(key in d)

16 Preprint               

> Ensures( len (d) == Old( len (d)) or
> (key not in Old(d) and len (d) == Old( len (d)) +1)) Ensures(d[key] == key)

Nagini fails to prove the disjunctive postcondition for the generated update, although all four target clauses are covered. This is a semantic proof difficulty rather than a parser or type failure. D.3 VGCR COMPENSATES HARDER SPECIFICATIONS 

The following cases satisfy the strictest preservation test: base and CGS+VGCR are joint successes, while CGS alone is not. VGCR edits executable code or implementation-level annotations only; the CGS specification and its coverage denominator remain fixed. 

Java, problem 16 (explicit witness). VGCR replaces the unprovable existential reasoning with a concrete index while retaining the same 5/5 specification coverage:                                                

> int min =a[0];
> int minIdx =0;
> int i=1;
> /*@ loop_invariant 0<= minIdx && minIdx <i; @ loop_invariant a[minIdx] == min; @ loop_invariant \forall int k; 0<= k&& k<i; min <= a[k]; @*/
> while (i <a.length) {
> if (a[i] <min) {min =a[i]; minIdx =i; }i++; }

Java, problem 3 (exception guards). CGS adds null and empty-array exceptional behaviors. VGCR makes those cases explicit before the indexed read, restoring validity and 4/4 joint success:              

> if (a == null ){
> throw new NullPointerException(); }
> if (a.length == 0) {
> throw new ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException(); }
> return a[0];

C, problem 21 (header restoration). The CGS precondition mentions INT MIN and INT MAX .The first generated source omits <limits.h> , so Frama-C aborts during specification parsing. VGCR restores the include; both target clauses remain covered and the program returns to joint success. 

Rust, problem 23 (mutability repair). CGS adds the frame fact ensures *v == *old(v) ,but the generated signature uses an immutable reference where the implementation expects a mu-table one. VGCR repairs the reference mutability and preserves the specification, turning the type error into a verified artifact. This is a code/interface repair, not a specification weakening. D.4 CODE GENERATION PERFORMANCE IS SENSITIVE TO RECEIVED SPECIFICATION 

Oracle specifications can remove failures that VGCR cannot repair. For C problem 10 (array double.c ), the self-spec Direct artifact times out with 12 of 13 goals proved, and self-spec VGCR does not recover it. The failing proof interface omits the loop variable from the loop frame and does not expose the arithmetic range needed for doubling array elements. In the oracle-conditioned Direct artifact, the loop frame includes both the index and the modified array range, and the contract makes the no-overflow condition explicit; Frama-C/WP proves all 14 goals. Rust problem 42 ( VecCopyPrefix ) exhibits the same sensitivity at the contract-syntax level: 17 Preprint                    

> Self: ensures dst.len() == old(dst).len() Oracle: ensures final(dst).len() == old(dst).len() ensures forall|i: int| 0<= i<n==> final(dst)[i] == src[i]

Verus rejects the self-generated form because a mutable-reference postcondition must disambiguate the pre- and post-state with old /final ; the oracle-conditioned Direct implementation verifies. These cases show that a specification can hinder downstream generation through its proof interface even when repair is available. 

Oracle specifications can also be harder to satisfy. The direction is not universal. For Rust problems 54 ( SquareBounded ) and 59 ( SafeMulSmall ), the self-spec Direct implementations verify, whereas the oracle-conditioned implementations fail with possible arithmetic overflow. The oracle contracts require the model to establish safe multiplication, an obligation absent from the self-generated contracts. Similarly, Java problem 16 ( ArrayMin ) verifies under the self-generated Direct contract but fails under the oracle-conditioned artifact because the generated loop writes 

clause omits modified locals. An oracle contract may therefore reveal real safety obligations while also making the associated code-and-proof task strictly more demanding. 

Equal validity can conceal a large adequacy gap. The clearest example is Kimi-K2.7-Code on the Rust track. Direct generation has exactly the same validity under Self and Oracle specifications, yet the self-generated contracts cover substantially fewer requirement targets: Table 5: Kimi-K2.7-Code Direct results on Rust. Oracle contracts have full target coverage by construction, whereas equal validity under Self does not imply adequate generated specifications.          

> Specification source Validity Coverage Joint success Self 91 0.697 57 Oracle 91 1.000 91

At the problem level, the equal validity totals arise from offsetting changes. Oracle contracts recover four failures (OptionIncrement , IsEven , ResultMapIncrement ,and VecSwapFirstLast ) but make four previously valid cases fail ( VecZeroPrefix ,

SquareBounded , SafeMulSmall , and VecTruncateOne ). The unchanged total of 91 there-fore hides both directions of specification sensitivity, while the 34-point joint-success gap exposes the missing requirement coverage in the self-generated contracts. D.5 TAKEAWAY 

Across these artifacts, CGS improves the semantic completeness of specifications and therefore mi-cro coverage, but can lower validity when it introduces alias, quantifier, disjunction, or exceptional-proof obligations. VGCR is useful precisely at this boundary: it uses verifier diagnostics to change the implementation while keeping the contract frozen. The resulting behavior explains why the aggregate table can show higher coverage and higher final joint success even when CGS alone low-ers verifier acceptance. The oracle cases further show that verifier acceptance and specification adequacy are non-interchangeable: validity is sensitive to the supplied proof interface, while joint success additionally detects contracts that omit required behavior. 

E PROMPT RECORDS 

This appendix gives compact, semantically complete records of every prompt stage used by the re-leased pipeline, with runtime fields represented by their names (requirement, specification, code, and diagnostics). System prompts require either strict JSON or code only, while user prompts define the schema and the frozen-specification boundary. The executable templates contain the same instructions with literal JSON schemas and language-specific placeholders. CGS means the constraint-extraction, constraint-to-specification, and self-check/refinement prompts. VGCR means the repair-analysis and focused candidate prompts. The same stage order is used in all four native verifier tracks. 18 Preprint E.1 C / ACSL 

SYSTEM (specification): You are an expert in ACSL specification design for C code. Return strict JSON only. USER (specification): Given the requirement below, design a minimal but useful ACSL function specification. Return JSON with function_signature, acsl_block, code_annotation_hints (loop_invariants, loop_assigns, loop_variants), and notes. The signature hint must be copied exactly. The ACSL block is a function contract only; put loop annotations in code_annotation_hints. SYSTEM (CGS extraction): You are an expert in translating requirements into verification constraints. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS extraction): Extract structured verification constraints from the requirement. Return function_signature, atomic preconditions, postconditions, invariants, and notes. Keep every constraint testable and concise. SYSTEM (CGS translation): You are an expert ACSL specification engineer. Convert constraints into a complete ACSL contract. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS translation): Create ACSL spec JSON using requirement + structured constraints + signature hint. Include requires/assigns/ensures; keep loop annotations outside the function contract and use valid/valid_read for pointers. SYSTEM (CGS self-check): You are a strict requirement-spec alignment reviewer. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS self-check): Check whether the generated specification misses requirement constraints. Return is_aligned, missing_constraints, inconsistent_items, refinement_hints, and notes. Use empty arrays when aligned. SYSTEM (CGS refinement): You refine ACSL specs to improve requirement alignment. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS refinement): Refine the generated specification from the original requirement, structured constraints, current specification, and alignment findings. Return the same specification schema. Preserve the signature; keep the ACSL block as a function contract and move loop annotations to code hints. SYSTEM (code generation): You are an expert C developer writing verification-friendly code. Output C code only. USER (code generation): Implement one C function from the requirement, signature, frozen ACSL block, and code-annotation hints. Keep exactly one matching implementation, keep the contract directly above it, do not change the contract, and place loop annotations immediately before their loops. SYSTEM (VGCR analysis): You are a verification-guided C/ACSL repair planner. Return strict JSON only. USER (VGCR analysis): Analyze a failed Frama-C/WP attempt. Return a failure summary, typed subgoals with verifier evidence and repair hints, a global strategy, and risk_notes. Treat the ACSL function contract as frozen. SYSTEM (VGCR candidate): You are an expert C developer using prove-as-you-generate repair. Output C code only. USER (VGCR candidate): Repair the implementation using the verifier-derived plan. Keep the frozen ACSL block directly above the function; do not change, weaken, reorder, or delete contract clauses. Change only the body and statement-level loop annotations. Output complete C source and no explanation. 

E.2 JAVA / JML 

SYSTEM (specification): You are an expert in JML specification design for Java code. Return strict JSON only. USER (specification): Given the Java requirement, class name, signature hint, and fixed type context, return function_signature, jml_block, code_annotation_hints, helper_declarations, and notes. Use OpenJML-compatible requires, assignable, ensures, and exceptional behavior. Preserve exact field names and narrow mutation frames. SYSTEM (CGS extraction): You are an expert in translating Java requirements into verification constraints. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS extraction): Extract atomic preconditions, postconditions, frame_conditions, exceptional_behaviors, invariants, and helper declarations. Include nullability, bounds, frames, object invariants, overflow, and exception constraints when relevant. SYSTEM (CGS translation): You are an expert JML specification engineer. Convert Java verification constraints into a complete OpenJML-compatible JML contract. Return strict JSON only. 

19 Preprint 

USER (CGS translation): Create JML spec JSON using requirement, constraints, signature hint, and exact type context. Emit independent clauses, narrow assignable frames, and valid \old/\result/\forall/\exists syntax. SYSTEM (CGS self-check): You are a strict Java requirement/JML-spec alignment reviewer. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS self-check): Check for missing or inconsistent Java constraints. Reject renamed fields, widened frames, combined atomic requirements, and conditional weakenings. Return is_aligned, missing_constraints, inconsistent_items, refinement_hints, and notes. SYSTEM (CGS refinement): You refine JML specs to improve Java requirement alignment. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS refinement): Refine the current JML specification using the original requirement, structured constraints, alignment findings, and fixed type context. Preserve exact field names, atomic clauses, narrow frames, and unconditional guarantees; keep loop annotations outside the method contract. SYSTEM (code generation): You are an expert Java developer writing OpenJML-friendly code. Output Java source code only. USER (code generation): Implement one complete source file from the requirement and frozen JML specification. Define one public class with the required name, keep the contract directly above the method, include required helpers, and add only implementation-level loop annotations. SYSTEM (VGCR analysis): You are a verification-guided Java/JML repair planner. Return strict JSON only. USER (VGCR analysis): Analyze the OpenJML result and produce typed subgoals, evidence, repair hints, a global strategy, and risk notes. Treat the JML method contract as frozen; prefer body, helper, and loop-annotation changes. SYSTEM (VGCR candidate): You are an expert Java/OpenJML developer using prove-as-you-generate repair. Output Java source code only. USER (VGCR candidate): Repair the implementation from the verifier-derived plan. Keep the frozen JML contract directly above the method and do not change, weaken, reorder, or delete clauses. Output one complete public class. 

E.3 RUST / V ERUS 

SYSTEM (specification): You are an expert in Rust verification with Verus. Return strict JSON only. USER (specification): Given the Rust requirement and signature hint, return function_signature, verus_contract, atomic verus_clauses, code_annotation_hints, and notes. Use named returns, old/final for mutable references, and v@ sequence views. Do not invent null, validity, ownership, wf, or panics predicates. SYSTEM (CGS extraction): You are an expert in translating Rust requirements into Verus verification constraints. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS extraction): Extract atomic preconditions, postconditions, panic_freedom, mutation_frame, and invariants. Include ownership/borrowing, vector bounds, Option/Result cases, overflow, and mutation effects when needed. SYSTEM (CGS translation): You are an expert Verus specification engineer. Convert Rust constraints into a complete Verus function contract. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS translation): Emit requires and ensures for every functional case, return value, mutation, and unchanged region. Use only v@.len(), v@[i as int], old(v)@, final(v)@, and valid Verus datatype projections. SYSTEM (CGS self-check): You are a strict Rust requirement/Verus-spec alignment reviewer. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS self-check): Check functional coverage and reject invented sequence members, dropped return cases, or dropped mutation/frame constraints. Return is_aligned, missing_constraints, inconsistent_items, refinement_hints, and notes. SYSTEM (CGS refinement): You refine Verus specs to improve Rust requirement alignment. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS refinement): Refine the Verus specification from the requirement, constraints, current specification, and findings. Preserve every correct functional clause; add or correct missing cases without deleting return, mutation, or unchanged-region facts. Keep loop annotations in code hints. SYSTEM (code generation): You are an expert Rust developer writing Verus-friendly code. Output Rust source code only. USER (code generation): Implement one complete Rust/Verus file from the requirement and frozen contract. Include vstd::prelude, one verus! block, and 

20 Preprint 

main outside it. Preserve requires/ensures semantics, use safe Rust, and add implementation-level invariants or decreases clauses when needed. SYSTEM (VGCR analysis): You are a verification-guided Rust/Verus repair planner. Return strict JSON only. USER (VGCR analysis): Analyze the Verus result and return typed subgoals, verifier evidence, concrete repair hints, a global strategy, and risk notes. Treat the Verus contract as frozen. SYSTEM (VGCR candidate): You are an expert Rust/Verus developer using prove-as-you-generate repair. Output Rust source code only. USER (VGCR candidate): Repair the implementation from the plan while keeping the frozen requires/ensures semantics. Change only body, helper proof code, and loop annotations; use safe Rust and preserve the verus! wrapper and main. 

E.4 PYTHON / N AGINI 

SYSTEM (specification): You are an expert in Python formal verification with Nagini. Return strict JSON only. USER (specification): Given the Python requirement and signature hint, return function_signature, nagini_contract, atomic nagini_clauses, code_annotation_hints, and notes. Use Requires, Ensures, Acc, Old, Result(), Implies, list_pred, and dict_pred as appropriate; keep the contract first in the function body. SYSTEM (CGS extraction): You are an expert in translating Python requirements into Nagini verification constraints. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS extraction): Extract atomic preconditions, postconditions, permission_conditions, exception_freedom, and invariants. Preserve boundary cases and use Old(...) for values read from pre-state containers. SYSTEM (CGS translation): You are an expert Nagini specification engineer. Convert Python constraints into a complete Nagini contract. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS translation): Emit atomic Requires/Ensures/Acc clauses. Use Result(), Implies(condition, conclusion), list_pred/dict_pred, Old(...), and ordinary Python Boolean expressions. Do not use wildcard, Forall, lambda triggers, or unsupported helper APIs. SYSTEM (CGS self-check): You are a strict Python requirement/Nagini-spec alignment reviewer. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS self-check): Check the original requirement as well as extracted constraints. Return is_aligned, missing_constraints, inconsistent_items, refinement_hints, and notes; preserve mutation facts, None cases, permissions, and exception freedom. SYSTEM (CGS refinement): You refine Nagini specs to improve Python requirement alignment. Return strict JSON only. USER (CGS refinement): Refine the Nagini specification using the requirement, constraints, current specification, and findings. Preserve correct atomic clauses, mutation and permission facts, boundary cases, and legal Nagini syntax; keep loop invariants in code hints. SYSTEM (code generation): You are an expert Python developer writing Nagini-friendly code. Output Python source code only. USER (code generation): Implement one complete Python source file from the requirement and frozen Nagini specification. Keep the target signature and contract as the first function statements, add no tests or top-level execution, and use simple Nagini-compatible code and supplied invariants only. SYSTEM (VGCR analysis): You are a verification-guided Python/Nagini repair planner. Return strict JSON only. USER (VGCR analysis): Analyze Nagini diagnostics and produce typed subgoals, evidence, repair hints, a global strategy, and risk notes. Treat the Nagini contract as frozen and do not suggest unsupported Fold/Unfold or element APIs. SYSTEM (VGCR candidate): You are an expert Python/Nagini developer using prove-as-you-generate repair. Output Python source code only. USER (VGCR candidate): Repair the implementation using the plan. Preserve the target signature and frozen contract semantics; change only body logic and Invariant annotations. Keep the required imports and use simple Nagini Python. 

21