Title: Agentic Model Checking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.21434v1

Published Time: Thu, 21 May 2026 01:35:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Agentic Model Checking 

Youcheng Sun † Jiawen Liu † Daniel Kroening ‡ Jason Xue ††Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE 

> ‡

Amazon, USA 

Abstract 

Verifying LLM-generated systems code is hard: bugs are prevalent, formal specifications are missing, and the safety contracts the code relies on are typically encoded implicitly at call sites rather than enforced at function boundaries. We propose agentic model checking ,a verification paradigm that couples LLM agents with a bounded model checking backend under the principle that agents propose, solvers verify .Agents handle every task that requires semantic judgment, including inferring per-function pre/postconditions, selecting which arithmetic checks are warranted, classifying counterexam-ples, and proposing refinements, while a BMC backend discharges every soundness-relevant decision. The paradigm rests on three architectural commitments. First, specifications are inferred top-down from caller context in a restricted DSL that translates deterministically into the backend’s native assume/assert primitives, with functional-correctness clauses that lift verification from panic-freeness to behavioural faithfulness. Second, verification is compo-sitional: each function is checked in isolation against its spec with callees replaced by stubs constrained by their postconditions, so the per-query cost scales with a single function’s state space rather than the whole program, and refinements propagate automatically to every caller’s harness. Third, counterexamples are not bug reports: they pass through a multi-stage validation pipeline (reachability, callee feasibility, dynamic replay, realism audit) that distinguishes active in-tree crashes from latent failures at the public-API boundary, while witnesses surviving only as modelling artifacts drive a compositional refinement loop rather than being suppressed or reported as false positives. The approach is language-agnostic in its agent-driven stages, dispatching to CBMC for C and Kani for Rust through per-backend adapters. We instantiate it in BMC-Agent, part of the AProver project ( https://github.com/agentic-prover/aprover ), and evaluate it on LLM-generated kernel and compiler code in both C and Rust as well as mature OSS-Fuzz-hardened libraries, demonstrating that the same pipeline confirms real defects, produces bounded clean verifications on heavily-fuzzed surfaces, and proves functional equivalence for selected algorithmic helpers. 

Keywords: bounded model checking, LLM agents, specification inference, counterexample classification, compositional verification, systems software 

1 Introduction 

LLM coding assistants now generate substantial bodies of systems-level code, including operating systems, compilers, device drivers, and embedded utilities, in both C and increasingly in Rust. Verifying this code is hard for reasons that compound: the developers who deploy it rarely understand every function in detail, manual specification is infeasible at scale, and the bugs that arise are predominantly low-level, integer overflows, off-by-one indices, missing bounds checks on malformed input, which by their nature require exhaustive reasoning over all input ranges to rule out. An LLM can flag suspicious patterns; it cannot prove their absence. A second pattern has become visible as we accumulate evidence across codebases: LLM-generated systems code consistently encodes safety contracts implicitly at call sites rather than 1

> arXiv:2605.21434v1 [cs.SE] 20 May 2026

enforcing them at function boundaries. The byte-helpers on the public API surface (slice-indexing readers, offset-arithmetic writers) lack bounds and overflow guards, while every existing caller maintains the missing invariant through surrounding loop or header-validation logic. The codebase works end-to-end on well-formed input and fails on adversarial or crafted input through the same public functions, even though no in-tree call site is currently exposed. A verifier that reports panics without distinguishing in-tree reachability from public-API ingress either over-reports (every helper looks broken) or under-reports (every helper looks fine because no current caller triggers it). Useful verification of LLM-generated code needs explicit framing: which threat model is in scope, and which bugs are active versus latent under that model. The verification community has long-standing techniques for exactly these bugs. Bounded model checking (BMC) [ 4 ] checks whether a program property is violated within an execution of at most k steps. CBMC [ 9 ] applies this to C by unrolling loops up to a bound k, encoding the path set as a SAT/SMT formula, and either verifying the property or returning a concrete counterexample. Kani [ 15 ] provides the analogous capability for Rust, lifting CBMC over MIR with Rust’s panic semantics baked in. Compositional verification [ 7 ] decomposes a system into components linked by assume-guarantee contracts, verifying each in isolation under assumptions on its environment. Counterexample-guided abstraction refinement (CEGAR) [ 8 ] iteratively strengthens an abstract model when a spurious counterexample is found. Each of these techniques assumes something LLM-generated code does not come with: a specification, a property catalog, or annotation work the original author performed. Recent work has begun to address the specification gap by using LLMs themselves to generate the missing artifacts. LLM agents, language models augmented with tool use (the ability to invoke external programs and observe their outputs within a reasoning loop) [ 18 ], have been applied to specification generation [ 11 , 16 , 17 ] and loop invariant inference [ 13 ]. Two patterns dominate, each with limitations. LLM-only pipelines scale and produce readable explanations but are unsound for arithmetic and memory safety, where exhaustive path analysis is the whole point. LLM-plus-deductive-checker pipelines are sound but depend on infrastructure that does not produce concrete counterexamples and struggles with loop-heavy systems code. 

Agentic model checking. We propose a new paradigm: LLM agents are coupled with a 

bounded model checking backend under the principle agents propose, solvers verify . Agents perform tasks that require semantic judgment: inferring specifications, selecting which arithmetic checks each function warrants, classifying counterexamples, proposing precondition refinements, and auditing whether findings correspond to states that arise in practice. Every output that could change a verification verdict passes through a deterministic check: a DSL parser, a BMC reachability query, an solver-based soundness guard, or concrete execution. Bounded model checking is the right backend for this arrangement for three reasons. First, BMC produces concrete counterexamples, which enable a classifier that distinguishes real bugs from spurious witnesses by running them against the real program rather than guessing at a verdict. Second, BMC checks each function in isolation against its spec with callees replaced by stubs, so verification parallelizes across the call graph and avoids whole-program state explosion. This is the assume-guarantee discipline [ 7] instantiated at the granularity of individual functions: each function’s pre/postconditions form its contract, and each callee’s postcondition becomes the assumption used at the call site. Third, when a spurious counterexample triggers a precondition tightening, the refined spec immediately improves verification of every caller, because the spec is reused as the callee’s stub in every caller’s harness. This is CEGAR [ 8 ] lifted from the predicate-abstraction level to the specification level, and extended with compositional propagation across the call graph. 

Contributions. 

1. Agentic model checking , a verification paradigm in which LLM agents handle tasks requiring 2semantic judgment (specification inference, check selection, counterexample classification, refinement proposal) while a BMC backend discharges every soundness-relevant decision, enabling specification-free verification of LLM-generated systems code in both C (via CBMC) and Rust (via Kani) ( §3). 2. A top-down specification and check-selection layer that infers per-function pre/postcon-ditions from caller context in a DSL translating deterministically into CBMC/Kani as-sumptions and assertions, selects per function which arithmetic checks are semantically warranted, and emits optional functional-correctness specs (reference-equivalence expres-sions, algebraic identities, round-trip properties) that lift verification from panic-freeness to behavioural faithfulness ( §3.1– §3.2, §3.1). 3. A compositional verification architecture that scales BMC to whole codebases by checking each function in isolation against its spec under assume-guarantee contracts, dispatching call-graph layers in parallel, and deduplicating witnesses before validation ( §3.3– §3.4). 4. A validation pipeline (input reachability, callee feasibility, dynamic replay, realism audit) that reports each finding as realistic or unrealistic bugs, and distinguishes active in-tree crashes from public-API ingress hardening tasks ( §3.5). 5. A multi-level refinement loop that lifts CEGAR to the specification level and extends it with compositional propagation: spurious counterexamples drive refinements at the verifier, caller, or callee-contract level, which once cleared by a soundness guard propagate as updated stubs to every caller’s harness and persist across runs in a spec store and witness-pattern library ( §3.6– §3.7). 6. BMC-Agent, evaluated across four corpora spanning both supported languages with promis-ing results pending broader quantitative evaluation: VibeOS (15,000 LoC, LLM-generated ARM64 kernel, C), where it confirms 34 realistic bugs across twelve modules with 16 repro-duced as runtime faults; five mature OSS targets (jq, OpenSSL, libcurl, libxml2, protobuf upb), where it discloses two undefined-behavior defects in jq and produces bounded clean verifications on heavily-fuzzed parser surfaces; an out-of-tree Realtek r8125 Linux driver, where it finds a CAP NET ADMIN -gated MMIO bounds-check bypass in rtl8125 tool ioctl ;and claudes-c-compiler , a 50,000-line LLM-generated Rust C compiler, where it confirms 25 real bugs (24 panic-class defects on public-API byte helpers plus 1 functional-correctness violation caught only by behavioural specs) and establishes bounded functional equivalence for ELF hash and header-write helpers ( §4). 

2 Motivating Example 

We walk through a real bug from the VibeOS kernel to show each phase of BMC-Agent in action. The example is small enough to follow line-by-line, yet exercises the full pipeline: specification inference from caller context, BMC discovery of a counterexample, classification, dynamic reproduction, and the realism audit. 

Code. kapi file size in kernel/kapi.c wraps the VFS layer for the kernel API table ( kapi )that user applications invoke via function pointers: Listing 1: kapi file size from VibeOS’s kernel API dispatcher.                  

> 1static int kapi_file_size ( void * node ) {
> 2if (! node ) return -1;
> 3vfs_node_t * n =( vfs_node_t *) node ;
> 4return ( int )n - > size ;
> 5}

3The function guards against a null node but then casts the opaque void* directly to 

vfs node t* without further validation. The null check makes the function look defensive to a code reviewer; the spec, generated by BMC-Agent, makes explicit that the null check is necessary but not sufficient. 

Phase 1 — Specification generation. BMC-Agent’s spec agent reads the function body together with the codebase domain summary (which identifies kapi * functions as the user-facing kernel API dispatch surface) and generates: 

• Precondition: 

null (node ) ∨ valid (node ).

The precondition admits any caller-supplied void* : either null, or a pointer the solver treats as dereferenceable. 

• Postcondition: if node is null, the function returns −1; otherwise, the returned value is required to equal (int)node->size . This is a stronger obligation than the precondition supplies: the precondition admits any non-null pointer, but the equality only holds when 

node actually addresses a vfs node t . The gap between the two is the bug. 

Phase 2 — BMC finds a counterexample. The harness non-deterministically initialises 

node (admitting null or a symbolically allocated vfs node t ), calls kapi file size , and asserts the postcondition. CBMC finds a counterexample violating main.assertion.2 : the postcondi-tion fails on the non-null branch because no constraint forces the witnessed pointer to address a real vfs node t . The witness is concrete: a non-null pointer that does not satisfy valid(node) .

Phase 3 — Counterexample classification. A call-site scan finds no in-corpus callers of 

kapi file size ; the function is registered in the kapi dispatch table as kapi.file size and invoked by user applications. BMC-Agent treats it as a system-entry point and proceeds directly to feasibility analysis. The classifier confirms: nothing prevents an application from supplying a non-null but invalid void* : a dangling pointer, a freed pointer, or an arbitrary integer cast to pointer type. Verdict: real bug , tier confirmed system entry .

Phase 3 Stage 3 — Dynamic validation. BMC-Agent compiles a GCC harness that supplies a non-null but unallocated pointer to kapi file size and installs handlers for SIGSEGV ,

SIGABRT , SIGFPE , and SIGILL . The null guard passes, but the subsequent read of n->size 

dereferences an invalid address and the harness terminates with SIGSEGV . The signal is on a source-level safety violation rather than an assertion property, so the finding is upgraded to tier 

confirmed dynamic .

Phase 3 Stage 4 — Realism audit. The realism agent reviews the full classification record and rates the finding realistic : the null check is present but does not protect against non-null invalid pointers; the function is exposed to user space via the kapi dispatch table; the only defence is the null check, which any non-null value bypasses trivially. No special conditions are required to trigger the fault. 

The architectural point. A reviewer reading kapi file size in isolation sees a function that handles its one obvious failure mode—null input. The bug is what the null check doesn’t protect against: the cast from opaque void* to typed pointer is unchecked, and the C type system has no way to express the missing obligation. BMC-Agent surfaces it because the LLM-generated postcondition makes the obligation explicit (the returned value must equal node->size , which requires node to address a real vfs node t ); BMC then finds a witness that violates the obligation; 4dynamic execution confirms the violation corresponds to a real segfault; and the realism audit confirms the witness corresponds to inputs a user application can actually supply. No single stage would suffice: the LLM alone cannot prove the postcondition is unviolated across all inputs, BMC alone cannot tell whether the witness is reachable, and dynamic execution alone cannot find the witness in the first place. 

Contrast with LLM-only verification. Asked to review the same function, a state-of-the-art LLM coding assistant flags the unsafe void* cast and the missing structural validation as concerns worth fixing, but characterizes the function as “not immediately exploitable” and “fragile and easy to misuse”, hedges that reflect the limits of pattern-matching review. The LLM can describe what a triggering input might look like, but cannot derive one from a sound search of the program’s input space, cannot confirm the input crashes under real execution, and cannot tell whether such inputs are reachable from any caller in the system. BMC-Agent supplies all three: a witnessing non-null invalid pointer (from BMC), a captured SIGSEGV from a compiled harness (from dynamic validation), and a confirmation that the kapi dispatch table exposes the function to user-space callers who can supply such pointers freely (from system-entry classification and realism audit). 

3 BMC-Agent Architecture 

Figure 1 presents the BMC-Agent architecture. The system combines LLM-driven semantic inference with deterministic bounded model checking under the principle: agents propose, solvers verify . The pipeline begins by parsing the source code, building the call graph, and constructing a compact codebase-wide domain summary from headers, types, function signatures, and optional external domain material such as API documentation or hardware specifications. 

Backend dispatch. BMC-Agent supports two BMC backends, selected by the input file’s language: CBMC [ 9 ] for C sources ( .c , .h ) and Kani [ 15 ] for Rust sources ( .rs ). Both expose the same per-function harness interface: a nondeterministic parameter-initialisation block, a precondition assumption, the call, and a postcondition assertion. CBMC encodes harnesses against C’s memory and arithmetic semantics; Kani encodes them against Rust’s typed slice/Vec model and Rust-specific panic primitives ( slice index fail , Result::unwrap failed ,

Option::expect failed , allocation capacity overflow , debug-mode integer-overflow). The rest of the pipeline (specification generation, flag selection, deduplication, validation, refinement, knowledge persistence) is backend-agnostic and runs unchanged on findings produced by either solver. Language-specific DSL extensions (e.g. old(EXPR) pre-state references for Rust state-mutating functions, §3.1; CPROVER old translation for C) live in per-backend adapter layers. The specification generator ( §3.1) infers per-function pre/postconditions top-down along the call graph. The flag selector ( §3.2) chooses which optional CBMC/Kani arithmetic checks are semantically warranted for each function. The BMC engine ( §3.3) then synthesizes and discharges one BMC harness per function via the selected backend. Each BMC run has two principal outcomes. If the backend finds no violation within the configured unwinding bound, BMC-Agent records a bounded, spec-relative verified-clean 

result. If the backend returns a counterexample, the witness is deduplicated and passed to the validation pipeline ( §3.5). Validation checks input reachability, callee feasibility, optional dynamic replay, and realism. Confirmed witnesses become bug reports with evidence tiers. Witnesses classified as unrealistic or uncertain by the realism audit trigger the adaptive refinement loop ( §3.6). Within the loop, an LLM proposes remediations such as verifier-level rules, caller-side strengthening, or callee/function-spec strengthening. A soundness guard checks that the proposed refinement does not mask real bugs before the system re-runs the BMC 5Figure 1: BMC-Agent architecture. The main pipeline parses the program, builds a domain summary, infers per-function specifications, selects function-specific BMC checks, and runs per-function BMC. Verified-clean results bypass validation and become bounded, spec-relative verification outcomes. A failing run yields a concrete counterexample, which is validated for reachability, callee feasibility, dynamic replay, and realism. Confirmed realistic findings become bug reports. Unrealistic or uncertain witnesses trigger the adaptive refinement loop, where the system proposes refinements, checks them with a soundness guard, and re-runs BMC under the refined assumptions or specifications. Persistent refinements are stored in the verification knowledge base. backend under the refined specifications or assumptions. Accepted refinements are stored in the verification knowledge base and reused across future sweeps. 

3.1 Specification Generation 

The specification generator is an LLM agent that traverses the call graph top-down, beginning from functions with no callers and proceeding layer by layer toward leaf functions. Generating specifications top-down derives each function’s intended behavior from how callers invoke it, rather than merely restating implementation details. For each function, the agent: (i) retrieves the function body, caller context, and domain summary; (ii) drafts a pre/postcondition pair in a restricted DSL; (iii) validates the draft against a deterministic parser; and (iv) retries on failure up to a configurable limit. 

Dual-source generation. When enabled, BMC-Agent generates each specification twice using different prompts: one emphasizing caller intent and one emphasizing implementation behavior. Disagreements are flagged for human review. 

Specification DSL. The DSL is designed to be expressive enough for driver- and OS-style bugs, while remaining reliably emittable by an LLM and directly translatable into the BMC backend’s native assume/assert primitives. The C path translates deterministically to __CPROVER_assume and 

> __CPROVER_assert

; the Rust path translates to kani::assume and kani::assert . Predicates that have no direct equivalent on one side (e.g. raw pointer validity in Rust harnesses, where references 6encode the constraint structurally) are handled by the per-backend adapter, which may map them to a no-op or an equivalent type-system encoding. 

Strongly connected components. Mutually recursive functions are condensed into SCC nodes and specified as a unit. SCC condensation is computed using Kosaraju’s algorithm. 

Functional-correctness specs. Beyond the defensive pre/post that rule out panic classes, the generator emits an optional functional spec clause: a boolean expression specifying what a correct implementation would compute , rather than merely what it must not do. The generator draws from a small set of templates that cover the common shapes of reference behaviour for low-level helpers: reference-equivalence expressions (the result equals a closed-form computation over the inputs), algebraic identities (the result satisfies a structural invariant such as alignment or modular constraints), fold expressions (the result equals an iterated computation over a sequence input), and round-trip properties (encoding followed by decoding returns the original value). When present, the functional spec is AND-merged into the postcondition, so the same BMC query discharges both panic-freeness and behavioural equivalence against the LLM-inferred reference. 

3.2 Per-Function Flag Selection 

BMC-Agent uses an LLM-based flag selector to determine which optional backend checks are semantically appropriate for each function. This avoids the noise introduced by globally enabling all arithmetic and memory checks. For each function on the C path, the selector may enable the corresponding CBMC flags: 

• --unsigned-overflow-check 

• --signed-overflow-check 

• --conversion-check 

• --pointer-overflow-check 

On the Rust path, the same flag selector chooses among Kani’s analogous flags (e.g. --default-unwind ,the overflow checks compile flag controlling debug-mode integer overflow panics, and un-wind/abort panic strategy selection). The selector runs in parallel across all functions and defaults conservatively (all flags off) on any LLM failure, ensuring verification is never blocked. 

3.3 Per-Function BMC 

The BMC engine synthesizes a BMC harness for each function. The harness initializes non-deterministic inputs, injects environmental assumptions, replays learned invariants from the verification knowledge base, translates specifications into BMC assumptions/assertions, invokes the target function, and checks postconditions and safety properties. BMC is executed under a configurable unwinding bound k (default 4) and per-function timeout (default 120 s). Backend-specific retry chains absorb transient inconclusive results: on the C path, when CBMC reports “too many addressed objects”, BMC-Agent retries with larger --object-bits settings before declaring the run inconclusive; on the Rust path, when Kani reports unwind-exhausted , BMC-Agent retries with the unwind bound quadrupled (default 4 → 16), and when Kani times out, BMC-Agent retries with a shrunk slice bound (4 → 2 → 1) and shorter wall-clock limit to coax verdicts out of state-heavy parser-loop functions. Both retry chains are bounded and the worst case yields an inconclusive verdict rather than blocking the pipeline. Each run has one of three outcomes: (i) verified clean , (ii) counterexample , or (iii) in-conclusive . Verified-clean results are recorded as bounded, spec-relative verification artifacts. Counterexamples proceed to deduplication and validation. Functions are dispatched in call-graph order: callees before callers, with parallelism inside each layer. 73.4 Counterexample Deduplication 

A single defect frequently produces many related BMC counterexamples. Before validation, BMC-Agent collapses redundant witnesses into representative counterexample classes grouped by (function, property type) .

3.5 Validation Pipeline 

A BMC counterexample is not treated as a bug report directly. After deduplication, each witness passes through four validation stages before emerging with an evidence tier. 

Stage 1: Input reachability. BMC-Agent propagates the witness inputs upward through the call graph, asking at each step whether the caller can supply the values the BMC backend chose. The point at which propagation halts (at a no-caller system boundary, or mid-chain) sets the witness’s reachability strength and feeds the final tier ( confirmed system entry vs. 

confirmed bmc ). 

Stage 2: Callee feasibility. BMC witnesses sometimes rest on stub return values no real implementation can produce. Stage 2 substitutes the real callee bodies, pins the witness inputs, and re-runs BMC. A witness that survives is symbolically reachable from a real call site through real callee behaviour. 

Stage 3: Dynamic replay. For surviving witnesses, BMC-Agent compiles a GCC harness and executes the witness on the host, catching SIGSEGV, SIGABRT, SIGFPE, and SIGILL. A captured signal upgrades the finding to confirmed dynamic . Because the harness models only the witness state (not the target platform’s allocator, memory protections, or scheduler) signal capture is sufficient evidence of a defect, not necessary: many real bugs reproduce only on the deployed system. 

Stage 4: Realism audit. Stages 1–3 establish symbolic reachability. They do not rule out witnesses that are unreachable in deployment for reasons outside the BMC model: impossible hardware states, uninitialized framework globals, lifecycle violations, or path-divergent unwind artifacts. The audit runs in two layers. Witness-pattern detectors encode known artifact classes as deterministic checks, including library-init globals set to NULL, USB-serial framework-managed pointers NULL on registered callbacks, NULL-guarded deref contradictions, and path-divergent unwinds. A matched witness is rejected without an LLM call. Remaining witnesses pass to an LLM audit that reads the specification, harness, witness state, and surrounding source context, and classifies the witness as realistic or unrealistic . Witnesses on which the LLM cannot commit to a verdict are folded into unrealistic so that any non-realistic finding is treated uniformly downstream; an internal confidence flag preserves the distinction for evaluation analysis. Realistic witnesses become bug reports. Unrealistic witnesses re-enter the adaptive refinement loop with their classification recorded, so subsequent iterations can tighten preconditions or model additional framework invariants. 

3.6 Adaptive Refinement and Re-verification 

Unrealistic witnesses enter the adaptive refinement loop. The loop does not suppress findings. It sharpens the verification model so the next BMC pass either confirms the bug, reaches a verified-clean result, or exposes a new witness class. 8Refinement proposal. Given the witness, harness, and source context, an LLM proposes one of three remediation classes: 

• Verifier-level : adjust the BMC backend’s parameters such as the unwinding bound, slice bound (Rust path), or active check selection. 

• Caller-side : tighten the function’s precondition using properties enforced at every observed call site. 

• Callee/spec : strengthen a stubbed callee’s contract from its actual implementation or from sibling-function behaviour. 

Soundness guard. Every proposed refinement passes through a deterministic guard that rejects refinements which could mask real bugs, for example over-strong preconditions that exclude legitimate caller behaviour or callee contracts incompatible with observed implementations. 

Re-verification. Accepted refinements trigger re-execution of the BMC backend under the new assumptions. Each function carries a bounded iteration budget; unresolved witnesses at the budget boundary are recorded for later review. 

3.7 Feedback Loop and Persistent Knowledge 

Successful refinements persist across verification runs. BMC-Agent maintains two stores: 

• A spec store keyed by function, recording the tightened pre- and post-conditions together with any callee contracts learned during refinement. 

• A pattern library of deterministic witness-pattern detectors (Section 3.5), extended whenever a witness class recurs often enough to justify codification. Over successive runs, recurring unrealistic witness classes are absorbed into the model rather than rediscovered. The pattern library short-circuits the LLM audit on known artifacts; the spec store reduces redundant spec-generation work on functions already analysed. 

3.8 Scalability via Compositional Decomposition and Parallelism 

Applying BMC directly to a whole codebase does not scale: the SAT/SMT encoding of a kernel blows up in state space, and loop unwinding compounds the cost. BMC-Agent sidesteps this by never posing a whole-program query. Five mechanisms, instantiated in the subsections just covered, combine to keep each BMC invocation small while covering the entire codebase. 

Per-function decomposition under assume-guarantee. Each function is checked in isolation against its inferred spec, with callees replaced by stubs constrained by their postconditions (§3.3). This is the assume-guarantee discipline instantiated at function granularity: a callee’s postcondition becomes the assumption used at the call site, so verification of any one function never depends on the body of any other. The state space the BMC backend must encode is bounded by a single function’s footprint rather than the whole program’s. 

Call-graph-ordered parallel dispatch. Functions are verified in call-graph order, callees before callers, so that the spec used as a callee stub is in hand by the time a caller is checked. Within each call-graph layer, functions are independent and dispatched concurrently ( §3.3). The flag selector ( §3.2) likewise runs in parallel across all functions as a separate pre-pass. Wall-clock verification time is dominated by the longest function in the deepest layer, not the sum across the codebase. 

Witness deduplication before validation. A single defect frequently produces many related counterexamples. BMC-Agent collapses witnesses into representative classes keyed by (function, property type) before validation ( §3.4), so the expensive stages (callee inlining, dynamic replay, and the LLM realism audit) run once per defect rather than once per witness. 9Targeted check selection. Per-function flag selection ( §3.2) enables only the arithmetic checks semantically warranted for each function, avoiding the encoding overhead and noise that globally enabling all checks would produce. 

Cross-run persistence. The spec store and pattern library ( §3.7) carry tightened specs and witness-pattern detectors across runs. Subsequent sweeps avoid redundant spec-generation work and short-circuit the realism audit on recurring artifact classes, so verification cost amortizes over the lifetime of a codebase rather than being paid in full on every run. Together these mechanisms decouple BMC’s per-query cost from the size of the program: the per-function query scales with a single function’s state space, and the per-codebase cost scales with the call graph rather than the program text. 

4 Evaluation 

4.1 Overall Results 

This section summaries the empirical evidence in one page; detailed artifacts and counterexamples appear in the appendix. 

Corpora. BMC-Agent has been exercised on four corpora of different shape, spanning both supported source languages (C via CBMC, Rust via Kani): (i) VibeOS , a 675-function, 37-module hobby kernel targeting bare-metal ARM64 (C; §A.1– §A.6); (ii) five OSS-Fuzz-hardened C libraries from the OpenSSF Internet Bug Bounty corpus—jq 1.8.1, OpenSSL master, libcurl, libxml2 2.16.0, and protobuf upb ( §B); (iii) the out-of-tree Linux driver realtek-r8125-dkms 

(C, four preprocessed translation units: rtltool , r8125 firmware , rtl eeprom , r8125 rss ); and (iv) claudes-c-compiler (CCC), a 50,000-line LLM-generated Rust implementation of a C compiler and ELF linker (Rust; §C). 

Confirmed real bugs (62 total). 

• VibeOS contributes 34 confirmed realistic findings (Table 1, twelve modules): 16 dynamically reproduced, 14 reaching a system entry, and four BMC-only model violations. 

• jq 1.8.1 contributes two pointer-arithmetic undefined-behaviour, filed as GHSA-ggc9-rpv2-xgpm and GHSA-gvwx-xj9r-3frq against jqlang/jq .

• The OOT Linux driver run contributes one : a u32 -wrap bounds-check bypass in rtl8125 too l ioctl (rtltool.c ) yielding a CAP NET ADMIN -gated arbitrary 32-bit-offset MMIO read-/write, surfaced autonomously once per-function flag selection ( §3.2) enabled --unsigned-ov erflow-check and --pointer-overflow-check .

• CCC (Rust, via Kani) contributes 25 confirmed real bugs : 24 panic-class defects on public-API byte helpers (slice-OOB reads/writes in elf/io.rs , linker common/write.rs ,

linker common/eh frame.rs , and frontend/preprocessor/utils.rs ; u64 overflow in 

align up 64 ; Cooper-Harvey-Kennedy dominator-walk OOB in ir/analysis.rs::interse ct ) plus one functional-correctness violation in common/types.rs::align up , which silently returns a misaligned value on overflow and is caught only by the behavioural spec (§3.1). 

Clean-verify evidence. Beyond confirmed bugs, the pipeline produces positive verification on heavily-defended hardened C. On OpenSSL ASN.1, 15 of 24 leaf functions verify clean, including every wire-format DER decoder. On libxml2, the pipeline clears pattern.c (54/54), xpointer.c 

(9/9), schematron.c (37/37), and reduces 127 raw CBMC counterexamples on encoding.c to zero confirmed bugs after the full pipeline runs. On curl strparse.c , 8 of 20 leaf parsers verify 10 clean; on protobuf upb, 3 of 3 leaf wire decoders verify clean. Three of the four OOT r8125 TUs verify clean of real bugs after the framework-invariant false-positive class is filtered. 

Where the precision comes from. We attribute the precision qualitatively to three mech-anisms. Realism-stage witness detectors (USB-serial, PHY, netdev-private back-pointer, path-divergent unwind, tagged-union stub disconnect) reject framework-invariant counterexamples that would otherwise mask real bugs. Per-function flag selection unlocks finding classes that CBMC’s default configuration is silent on (the rtl8125 tool ioctl overflow above; the calloc 

and mouse set pos arithmetic overflows in Case Study 3 and the stbtt * family). The feedback loop converts witness patterns observed during a sweep into permanent project invariants (e.g., 

xmlMalloc != NULL && xmlRealloc != NULL && xmlFree != NULL for libxml2), converging specifications without manual intervention. A controlled ablation isolating each mechanism’s contribution is left to future work. 

4.2 Threats to Validity Spec correctness. Each finding depends on the LLM generating a correct spec. In the confirmed bugs across our corpora, the inferred specs directly encode the exploited safety property, and the dual-source generation mechanism flags precondition-postcondition tensions where the two clauses encode different obligations. Over-weak specs cause bugs to be missed silently, which is the primary failure mode and the one the pipeline cannot self-detect; the realism checker absorbs some spec-mismatch cases by rejecting witnesses it cannot defend, but a spec that is uniformly too permissive produces no counterexample at all and leaves no trace. 

Unwinding bound. The loop bound k = 4 limits exploration depth. When a function’s loop runs against an unconstrained input, BMC fires a loop-unwind artifact that the refinement loop suppresses by tightening the precondition before re-running, so loop-artifact counterexamples do not silence the underlying defect. Bugs that manifest only at loop depth > 4 under realistic preconditions, however, will not be found. 

Dynamic harness validity. Dynamic validation in BMC-Agent is a host-side replay step: the system compiles a GCC harness for the BMC witness and executes it on x86-64 Linux, catching native signals such as SIGSEGV and SIGABRT . These signal labels are therefore evidence from the host harness, not claims about POSIX-style signal delivery on stock VibeOS/QEMU. Among the 16 confirmed dynamic findings, 12 are target-independent API, library, network, or arithmetic bugs. The remaining four have target- or initialization-specific caveats ( kapi get datetime ,

keyboard irq handler , hal usb get device info , and hal usb mouse poll ) and were checked separately in the manual review. Findings in the confirmed system entry and con-firmed bmc tiers do not rely on captured host-harness signals; their evidence comes from system-entry reachability and the CBMC model, respectively. 

5 Related Work 

LLM agents for verification. The closest related work generates specifications with an LLM and discharges them against a checker that is itself an LLM, a deductive solver, or both. FM-Agent [ 11 ] infers Hoare-style pre/postconditions top-down from caller context and uses LLM reasoning to verify each function against its spec; it is effective on semantic and logic bugs, but its verification step is not sound for arithmetic or memory safety. AutoSpec [ 16 ] synthesizes ACSL specifications for Frama-C/Wp by coupling LLM generation with static analysis and a deductive checker in a refinement loop. Lemur [ 17 ] uses LLMs to generate verification artifacts that a solver then checks. Loop-invariant generation work [ 13 ] applies the same pattern at the level of 11 individual invariants. BMC-Agent contributes to this line by using bounded model checking as the verification backend, which yields concrete counterexamples that enable a classifier and a compositional refinement loop that propagates spec improvements across the call graph. 

Traditional driver and kernel verification. SLAM [ 2 ], deployed as the Static Driver Verifier (SDV) [ 3 ], checks fixed catalogs of API-usage properties on Windows device drivers. Smatch [ 6]uses pattern-based static analysis on the Linux kernel. Both check properties defined ahead of time by tool authors. BLAST [ 12 ] is a related software model checker for C using predicate abstraction with CEGAR; like SDV it requires a user-supplied property, but does not ship with a fixed catalog. None of these tools easily express codebase-specific invariants that depend on how a function is used. BMC-Agent generates function-specific specifications from caller context, at the cost of a dependence on LLM judgment that pattern-based tools do not carry. 

Symbolic execution. KLEE [ 5 ] achieves high path coverage via symbolic execution but struggles with unbounded loops and large call graphs. Serval [ 14 ] applies symbolic evaluation to verified system kernels within decidable fragments. Both differ from BMC-Agent in operating at the whole-function or whole-system level rather than per-function with caller-derived specs. 

Deductive verification. Frama-C/Wp [ 10 ] and related tools support full functional correctness within deductive frameworks but require significant manual annotation effort. BMC-Agent targets the annotation-free, automated end of the spectrum, sacrificing completeness for scalability and concrete counterexamples. 

CEGAR. Counterexample-guided abstraction refinement [ 8] is a classical technique for itera-tively refining abstract models when spurious counterexamples are found. BMC-Agent applies the CEGAR idea at the specification level (refining LLM-generated specs rather than predicate abstractions)and extends it with compositional propagation to callers. 

6 Conclusion 

We have presented agentic model checking and BMC-Agent, which pairs LLM agents for speci-fication inference, counterexample classification, and precondition refinement with a bounded model checking backend (CBMC for C, Kani for Rust) as the soundness anchor. The central architectural principle— agents propose, solvers verify —assigns to LLMs the tasks that require semantic judgment while reserving every soundness-relevant decision for a deterministic check. Evaluations on LLM-generated kernel and compiler code in both C and Rust, alongside ma-ture OSS-Fuzz-hardened libraries, exercise every pipeline phase and produce confirmed defects, bounded clean verifications, and bounded functional-equivalence results on selected helpers. 

Future work. The most important next steps are (i) a broad quantitative evaluation establishing precision and recall at scale, with controlled ablations of each pipeline stage and head-to-head comparison against BMC-alone baselines; (ii) a deeper answer to the spec-correctness assumption, through spec triangulation across multiple sources and a measured audit of LLM-inferred references; (iii) evaluating BMC-Agent on historical buggy corpora to assess generalisation beyond LLM-generated code; and (iv) reducing token cost via spec-store reuse and stage-level distillation, so that whole-codebase sweeps amortise across runs rather than paying full cost each time. 

References 

[1] Vibeos. https://github.com/kaansenol5/VibeOS , 2026. GitHub repository, accessed 2026-05-18. 12 [2] Thomas Ball, Rupak Majumdar, Todd Millstein, and Sriram K Rajamani. Automatic predicate abstraction of c programs. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2001 conference on Programming language design and implementation , pages 203–213, 2001. [3] Thomas Ball, Ella Bounimova, Byron Cook, Vladimir Levin, Jakob Lichtenberg, Con McGarvey, Bohus Ondrusek, Sriram K Rajamani, and Abdullah Ustuner. Thorough static analysis of device drivers. volume 40, pages 73–85. ACM New York, NY, USA, 2006. [4] Armin Biere, Alessandro Cimatti, Edmund Clarke, and Yunshan Zhu. Symbolic model check-ing without bdds. In International conference on tools and algorithms for the construction and analysis of systems , pages 193–207. Springer, 1999. [5] Cristian Cadar, Daniel Dunbar, and Dawson Engler. KLEE: Unassisted and automatic generation of high-coverage tests for complex systems programs. In Proceedings of the 8th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’08) ,pages 209–224, San Diego, CA, USA, December 2008. USENIX Association. URL https: //www.usenix.org/legacy/event/osdi08/tech/full_papers/cadar/cadar.pdf .[6] Dan Carpenter. Smatch: Pluggable static analysis for c. https://lwn.net/Articles/ 691882/ , 2016. [7] Sagar Chaki, Edmund M Clarke, Alex Groce, Somesh Jha, and Helmut Veith. Modular verification of software components in c. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 30 (6):388–402, 2004. [8] Edmund Clarke, Orna Grumberg, Somesh Jha, Yuan Lu, and Helmut Veith. Counterexample-guided abstraction refinement. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification ,pages 154–169. Springer, 2000. [9] Edmund Clarke, Daniel Kroening, and Flavio Lerda. A tool for checking ansi-c programs. In International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems , pages 168–176. Springer, 2004. [10] Pascal Cuoq, Florent Kirchner, Nikolai Kosmatov, Virgile Prevosto, Julien Signoles, and Boris Yakobowski. Frama-c: a software analysis perspective. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Software Engineering and Formal Methods , SEFM’12, page 233–247, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 9783642338250. doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-642-33826-7 16. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33826-7_16 .[11] Haoran Ding, Zhaoguo Wang, and Haibo Chen. Fm-agent: Scaling formal methods to large systems via llm-based hoare-style reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.11556 , 2026. [12] Thomas A Henzinger, Ranjit Jhala, Rupak Majumdar, and Gregoire Sutre. Lazy abstrac-tion. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT symposium on Principles of programming languages , pages 58–70, 2002. [13] Ruibang Liu, Minyu Chen, Ling-I Wu, Jingyu Ke, and Guoqiang Li. Enhancing automated loop invariant generation for complex programs with large language models. Science of Computer Programming , page 103387, 2025. [14] Luke Nelson, James Bornholt, Ronghui Gu, Andrew Baumann, Emina Torlak, and Xi Wang. Scaling symbolic evaluation for automated verification of systems code with serval. In 

Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , SOSP ’19, page 225–242, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450368735. doi: 10.1145/3341301.3359641. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3341301. 3359641 .13 [15] Alexa VanHattum, Daniel Schwartz-Narbonne, Nathan Chong, and Adrian Sampson. Veri-fying dynamic trait objects in rust. In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice , pages 321–330, 2022. [16] Cheng Wen, Jialun Cao, Jie Su, Zhiwu Xu, Shengchao Qin, Mengda He, Haokun Li, Shing-Chi Cheung, and Cong Tian. Enchanting program specification synthesis by large language models using static analysis and program verification. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification , pages 302–328. Springer, 2024. [17] Haoze Wu, Clark Barrett, and Nina Narodytska. Lemur: Integrating large language models in automated program verification. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,volume 2024, pages 2968–2978, 2024. [18] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. ICLR , 2023. 

# Appendix 

A VibeOS Case Studies 

We evaluate BMC-Agent on VibeOS [ 1], a bare-metal ARM64 hobby operating system of approximately 15,000 lines of C written with substantial LLM assistance. We chose VibeOS because it is representative of the LLM-generated systems code that motivates this work and it is publicly available and independently developed, ruling out circularity. To probe the agent’s behaviour on mature, heavily-fuzzed targets we additionally sweep selected functions from real-world OSS libraries (jq, OpenSSL, libcurl, libxml2, protobuf upb); these results appear in Section B. We trace five confirmed bugs end-to-end through every pipeline phase. Each case study is drawn from a different VibeOS kernel module, exercises a different bug class, and highlights a distinct pipeline aspect: 

• §A.1 ( net get mac ) — the simplest path : a missing-precondition fault found and confirmed in a single CBMC pass. 

• §A.2 ( kapi file size ) — postcondition-driven checking : an insufficient-validation bug in the kernel API dispatcher, detected because the LLM spec makes the expected return contract explicit. 

• §A.3 ( calloc ) — CEGAR refinement and per-function flag selection : a CWE-190 integer overflow in the kernel allocator, detectable either via CEGAR (spurious loop artifact 

→ refinement → real bug) or via Phase 1.5 flag selection (LLM autonomously enables 

--unsigned-overflow-check for arithmetic on external sizes, finding the overflow directly in one pass). 

• §A.4 ( stbtt buf get ) — attacker-controlled input : an out-of-bounds buffer read in the CFF font parser, triggerable by loading a crafted OpenType font file. 

• §A.5 ( vfs lookup ) — multiple bugs, one function : two distinct vulnerabilities in the VFS path resolver found by a single CBMC run, both reachable from any file-open syscall. 

Setup. CBMC 5.95.1, loop-unwinding bound k = 4, per-function timeout 120 s, LLM backbone claude-sonnet-4-6. Dynamic validation uses GCC 12.3 on an x86-64 Linux host running in 

verify-dir whole-codebase mode. 14 Full-codebase results. Running BMC-Agent over all 37 kernel modules (675 functions anal-ysed) with all confirmation tiers and realism auditing enabled produced 34 confirmed realistic findings (out of 145 deduplicated counterexample reports); the realism audit additionally flagged 85 reports as unrealistic (hardware stubs, uninitialized global state, or infeasible symbolic inputs) and 26 as uncertain , both of which we exclude from the headline count. Table 1 lists all 34 findings, grouped by confidence tier: 16 in confirmed dynamic (a runtime fault reproduced by a GCC-compiled harness), 14 in confirmed system entry (counterexample reachable from a no-caller entry function), and 4 in confirmed bmc (formal model violation; reachability not yet traced to entry). The bugs span twelve kernel modules; the TTF font renderer ( stb truetype )dominates with 16 of the 34 findings, all rooted in missing bounds validation on values derived from the font file itself, making them triggerable by loading a crafted font. The remaining 18 bugs cluster in the public kernel API ( kapi.c , 4), the HAL/platform layer ( platform.c , 3), USB HID input ( usb hid.c , 2), the FAT32 driver ( fat32.c , 2), and seven single-bug modules covering memory allocation, VFS, ELF loading, IRQ handling, and input drivers. 

Table 1: All 34 confirmed realistic findings from the vibeos full check10 run. Tier: D = confirmed dynamic ,S = confirmed system entry , B = confirmed bmc . Signal column reports the POSIX signal observed by the dynamic harness ( --- when no harness was executed). 

# Function Module T Sig. Root cause 

1 hal dma fb copy platform.c D SIGABRT Width × height overflow in unguarded DMA copy 2 kapi delete kapi.c D SIGSEGV Null path pointer; no guard on public API 3 kapi file size kapi.c D SIGSEGV Null-check present but non-null invalid pointer bypasses it 4 kapi get datetime kapi.c D SIGSEGV Null output buffer; no validation 5 kapi rename kapi.c D SIGSEGV Uninitialised VFS global state on rename 6 keyboard irq handler keyboard.c D SIGSEGV Contract violation in IRQ handler 7 mouse set pos mouse.c D SIGABRT Signed integer overflow in x ⋅ 32768 8 net get mac net.c D SIGSEGV Null output MAC buffer 9 hal usb get device info platform.c D SIGSEGV Null device-info buffer 10 stbtt FreeShape ttf.c D SIGSEGV Null vertices pointer in free 11 stbtt GetBakedQuad ttf.c D SIGSEGV Unbounded char index OOB on chardata 

12 stbtt GetFontVMetrics ttf.c D SIGSEGV Crafted hhea offset → OOB read 13 stbtt GetKerningTableLength ttf.c D SIGSEGV OOB on crafted kerning table 14 stbtt GetPackedQuad ttf.c D SIGSEGV Unchecked char index in pointer arithmetic 15 ttUSHORT ttf.c D SIGSEGV OOB read in 16-bit byte-swap helper 16 hal usb mouse poll usb hid.c D SIGSEGV Null report pointer to memcpy 

17 read32 fat32.c S — Integer overflow in 32-bit FAT read 18 write32 fat32.c S — Invalid directory-entry pointer in write 19 malloc memory.c S — Integer overflow in size-class arithmetic 20 hal get time us platform.c S — Division by zero when cntfrq el0 = 0 21 stbtt GetFontBoundingBox ttf.c S — OOB read on info->data[info->head+42] 

22 stbtt GetNumberOfFonts internal ttf.c S — No bounds-check on font collection 23 stbtt GetScaledFontVMetrics ttf.c S — NaN size triggers wrong scale path 24 stbtt PackEnd ttf.c S — Null spc ; possible double-free 25 stbtt ScaleForMappingEmToPixels ttf.c S — Crafted head -table offset → OOB 26 stbtt ScaleForPixelHeight ttf.c S — Crafted hhea offset → OOB 27 stbtt isfont ttf.c S — Truncated/crafted font header OOB 28 ttULONG ttf.c S — Invalid input in 32-bit byte-swap helper 29 hal usb keyboard poll usb hid.c S — Null report pointer to memcpy 

30 vfs read vfs.c S — Null buffer / invalid fd 

31 elf process relocations elf.c B — Unbounded relocation-table loop on crafted ELF 32 wsod draw line irq.c B — Underflow in fb width-40 → ∼ 232 loop 33 stbtt CompareUTF8toUTF16 bigendian prefix ttf.c B — Odd len2 → signed underflow → infinite loop 34 stbtt setvertex ttf.c B — Silent vertex-coordinate truncation overflow 

Manual validation on the target. As an additional sanity check, we manually replayed a small subset of the most reportable findings on the stock VibeOS/QEMU image. This step is separate from the automated tier assignment in Table 1: the dynamic tier still refers to the host GCC harness, while the target runs show how selected defects manifest in the bare-metal runtime. We also tried straightforward local fixes for these cases and checked whether the observed 15 behavior changed as expected. The replayed cases include hal dma fb copy , kapi file size ,

kapi rename , net get mac , read32 , and vfs read . In the cases with observable target-level behavior, the trial fixes changed the result in the expected direction: overflowed DMA copies and NULL rename arguments were rejected, forged VFS handles no longer returned attacker-controlled file metadata or file contents, and the read32 byte-shift fix eliminated the corresponding UBSan warning. VibeOS also defines POSIX-style signal constants for libc compatibility, but the current 

signal() and raise() implementations are stubs; therefore the QEMU replay records target behavior rather than reinterpreting the host-harness signal labels. The following five subsections trace one representative bug from each major pipeline path end-to-end; §A.6 surveys the rest of the 34 findings in less depth. 

A.1 Case Study 1 — net get mac : Missing Precondition Source. net get mac in kernel/net.c copies the host MAC address into a caller-supplied buffer: Listing 2: net get mac (kernel/net.c:97 ).         

> 1void net_get_mac ( uint8_t * mac ) {
> 2memcpy ( mac , our_mac , 6) ;
> 3}

The function performs no validation of mac : it silently assumes the caller has allocated a six-byte buffer. This is a typical implicit API contract that is invisible to the C type system. 

Phase 1 — Specification generation. The spec agent reads the function body and its role as a public network API. It generates: 

• Precondition : valid range(mac, 0, 6) — the output buffer must be a valid allocation of at least six bytes. 

• Postcondition : valid range(mac, 0, 6) && the six bytes at mac[0..5] contain the cur-rent network interface MAC address. The precondition makes explicit an assumption the code leaves entirely implicit. 

Phase 2 — BMC. The harness generator produces a CBMC harness that initialises mac as a nondeterministic pointer and calls net get mac . The generated precondition is asserted before the call and the postcondition is asserted on return. CBMC immediately finds a counterexample: 

mac = NULL 

The failing property is net get mac.precondition instance.3 . The witness requires no loop, no arithmetic, and no callee reasoning — one symbolic step suffices to falsify the harness. 

Phase 3 Stage 1 — Feasibility check. The classifier asks whether the counterexample input is reachable in the real system. A call-site scan finds no callers of net get mac anywhere in the corpus; the function is a system-entry point. An LLM reasoning step confirms: no caller constrains mac to a non-null value, so any external consumer can supply NULL . Classification: 

is real bug = True , system entry reached = True .

Phase 3 Stage 3 — Dynamic validation. The dynamic validator compiles a GCC har-ness that calls net get mac(NULL) and installs signal handlers for SIGSEGV/SIGABRT/SIGF-PE/SIGILL. Execution on the x86-64 host produces SIGSEGV : memcpy writes through a null pointer. The confidence tier is upgraded to confirmed dynamic .16 Phase 3 Stage 4 — Realism check. The realism agent reviews the full finding and rates it 

REALISTIC : 

> net get mac is a public API with no NULL guard. Any external consumer that passes an uninitialised or error-path pointer triggers the fault immediately. No special conditions are required to exploit this.

Root cause and fix. A one-line null guard resolves the issue:            

> 1void net_get_mac ( uint8_t * mac ) {
> 2if (! mac ) return ;
> 3memcpy ( mac , our_mac , 6) ;
> 4}

Summary. This case illustrates the simplest BMC-Agent pipeline path: spec generation exposes an implicit assumption; a single CBMC invocation finds the violation; LLM and dynamic confirmation require no refinement. The bug class — missing precondition in a public API — is routine but consequential: a kernel network driver silently crashes on a null pointer any consumer can supply. 

A.2 Case Study 2 — kapi file size : Insufficient Pointer Validation Source. kapi file size in kernel/kapi.c wraps the VFS layer for the kernel API table (kapi ) that user applications call via function pointers: Listing 3: kapi file size (kernel/kapi.c:127 ).                  

> 1static int kapi_file_size ( void * node ) {
> 2if (! node ) return -1;
> 3vfs_node_t * n =( vfs_node_t *) node ;
> 4return ( int )n - > size ;
> 5}

The function guards against a null node but then casts the opaque void* directly to 

vfs node t* without further validation. Any non-null but invalid pointer — dangling, freed, or an arbitrary integer cast to pointer type — passes the guard, and the subsequent read of 

n->size is undefined behaviour. 

Phase 1 — Specification generation. The spec agent generates: 

• Precondition : null(node) || (valid(node) && node points to a valid vfs node t with an accessible size field ).

• Postcondition : returns −1 when node is null, and otherwise returns ((vfs node t*)node)->size .The agent records a semantic tension between the two clauses: the precondition admits null or valid-pointer inputs, while the postcondition requires valid memory access for the non-null branch. This is exactly the gap the BMC backend will exploit to produce a counterexample. 

Phase 2 — BMC. The harness nondeterministically initialises node (admitting null or a symbolically allocated vfs node t ), calls kapi file size , and asserts the postcondition. CBMC finds a counterexample violating main.assertion.2 : the postcondition check for the non-null branch fails for a symbolically allocated node with an unconstrained size field. This witnesses that the function’s stated return contract cannot be guaranteed when the pointer originates from an untrusted caller. 17 Phase 3 Stage 1 — Feasibility check. kapi file size is registered as kapi.file size in the kernel API dispatch table; call-site analysis finds no callers in the corpus, confirming it is a system-entry point. The LLM classifier confirms: user applications invoke this via the kapi table with an opaque void* argument, and nothing prevents supplying a non-null, non-valid pointer. Classification: is real bug = True , system entry reached = True .

Phase 3 Stage 3 — Dynamic validation. The dynamic validator compiles a GCC harness that supplies a non-null but unallocated pointer to kapi file size . The null guard passes, but 

n->size reads from an invalid address, producing SIGSEGV . Tier: confirmed dynamic .

Phase 3 Stage 4 — Realism check. The realism agent rates the finding REALISTIC :  

> The null check is present but does not protect against non-NULL invalid pointers. The function is exposed as kapi.file size callable from user applications. The only defence is the null check, which any non-null value bypasses trivially.

Root cause and fix. A null check alone is insufficient for a pointer that originates from an untrusted caller. The correct fix depends on system design: either the API should accept a typed handle validated at creation time rather than a raw void* , or the VFS layer should validate the node pointer against a known-valid registry before dereferencing it. 

Summary. This case illustrates how LLM-generated postconditions surface semantic obligations that the type system cannot express. The null check makes the function appear safe to a code reviewer; the spec makes explicit that the null check is necessary but not sufficient, and CBMC confirms the violation. 

A.3 Case Study 3 — calloc : Integer Overflow Source. calloc in kernel/memory.c is VibeOS’s own kernel memory allocator: Listing 4: calloc (kernel/memory.c:186 ).                                                

> 1void * calloc ( size_t nmemb , size_t size ) {
> 2size_t total =nmemb *size ; /* no overflow guard */
> 3void * ptr =malloc ( total ) ;
> 4if ( ptr != NULL ) {
> 5uint8_t * p =( uint8_t *) ptr ;
> 6for ( size_t i=0; i<total ; i ++) p [ i ] =0;
> 7}
> 8return ptr ;
> 9}

Line 2 multiplies nmemb and size without any overflow guard. When the product exceeds 

SIZE MAX it wraps silently, causing malloc to receive a much smaller size than intended and returning a fatally undersized buffer. The standard portable guard is: if (nmemb != 0 && size > SIZE MAX / nmemb) return NULL; 

Phase 1 — Specification generation. The spec agent generates: 

• Precondition : requires nmemb * size ≤ SIZE MAX && (nmemb == 0 || size == 0 || nmemb * size ≥ nmemb) .

• Postcondition : null( \result) || (valid range( \result, 0, nmemb * size) && all bytes in \result[0..nmemb*size) are initialised to zero ).The precondition explicitly captures the arithmetic safety invariant the code omits. 18 Phase 2, Round 1 — BMC finds a spurious counterexample. CBMC checks calloc 

against the generated spec. With total unconstrained, the zero-initialisation loop runs up to 

total iterations; at bound k = 4, CBMC fires the loop-unwinding assertion: Failing property: calloc.unwind.0 

This is a loop-bound artifact , not a postcondition violation or safety check: CBMC cannot explore beyond four loop iterations for an unconstrained loop count. 

Phase 3, Round 1 — SPURIOUS classification and spec refinement. The classifier analyses the counterexample trace and determines it is spurious :       

> Loop-bound artifact: calloc.unwind.0 fires at k=4for unconstrained total . This is not reportable without a spec that constrains the loop-input range.

Because the classifier produces a final precondition (a tighter constraint that excludes the loop-artifact inputs), the pipeline performs spec refinement :1. A refined spec is constructed with the tightened precondition and replaces the original in current specs .2. The refined spec is persisted to the artifact store. 3. calloc is added to the self-recheck queue : the CEGAR re-verification queue for functions whose precondition was tightened after a spurious counterexample. Without this step a tool that only filters (never refines) would either report the loop artifact as a false positive or drop it silently — and never discover the real bug hiding behind it. 

Phase 2, Round 2 — CEGAR re-verification reveals the real bug. BMC-Agent re-runs CBMC on calloc under the refined precondition. With the loop-artifact inputs excluded, CBMC freely explores the arithmetic path and finds a new counterexample: 

nmemb = 9 223 372 036 854 775 808 (2 63 ), size = 0 , total = 0 

The failing property is main.assertion.1 : the postcondition valid range( \result, 0, nmemb * size) is violated because nmemb * size wraps to 0 while nmemb is 2 63 . The root cause — the absent overflow guard — also allows callers to supply large non-zero values (e.g., nmemb = 232 ,size = 232 ) that silently produce a zero-byte or undersized allocation. 

Phase 3, Round 2 — Feasibility check. calloc is VibeOS’s own kernel allocator with no callers in the corpus; it is a public system-entry point. The LLM confirms: no caller constrains 

nmemb or size , so any consumer — including user applications making allocation requests — can supply overflow-inducing values. Classification: is real bug = True , system entry reached = True .

Phase 3 Stage 3 — Dynamic validation. The dynamic validator compiles a GCC harness:                   

> 1void * p =calloc (9223372036854775808 UL , 0 UL ) ;
> 2/* assert : p== NULL or pis valid for nmemb * size bytes */

Execution produces SIGABRT : the glibc heap corruption detector fires when malloc(0) 

returns a zero-byte allocation that the harness then attempts to use as a 2 63 -element array. Tier: 

confirmed dynamic .19 Phase 3 Stage 4 — Realism check. The realism agent rates the finding REALISTIC :     

> The missing overflow check is a well-known vulnerability pattern (CWE-190). A caller passing
> nmemb = 232 , size = 232 on a 64-bit system receives a zero-byte or NULL allocation, leading to a heap overflow on first write. This class of bug has caused real CVEs (e.g. CVE-2010-1628 and similar heap-overflow vulnerabilities arising from calloc size-computation wrapping).

Independent cross-validation. At the time of this evaluation the VibeOS public issue tracker contained an independently filed report (issue #26) describing the same calloc integer-overflow vulnerability in memory.c . BMC-Agent discovered the bug automatically via formal verification without any knowledge of the issue; the independent human report provides external ground-truth confirmation that the finding is not a tool artefact. 

Phase 1.5 — Direct detection via per-function flag selection. The CEGAR path de-scribed above detects the overflow indirectly: the loop-artifact counterexample triggers refinement, which in turn exposes the arithmetic path. When Phase 1.5 flag selection is enabled, BMC-Agent can detect the same bug directly in a single BMC pass. The flag-selection agent examines calloc ’s body and reasons:      

> The function multiplies two external size parameters ( nmemb ×size ) to compute an allocation size passed to malloc , which can wrap around to a small value causing under-allocation. ⇒
> --unsigned-overflow-check :true .

With --unsigned-overflow-check enabled for calloc , CBMC adds an assertion before each un-signed multiplication. The very first BMC pass—before any CEGAR iteration—fires calloc.overflow.1 

with witness nmemb = 263 , size = 2, total = 2: the multiplication overflows and the caller receives a fatally undersized buffer. The call-chain validator then traces a second overflow (malloc.overflow.1 ) downstream: malloc ’s ALIGN UP(size, 16) also overflows when the wrapped total value is near SIZE MAX .The two detection paths are complementary. CEGAR handles the case where the overflow is masked by a loop artifact and the arithmetic check is not yet enabled; Phase 1.5 handles the case where a targeted check exposes the overflow directly. Both converge on the same CWE-190 root cause. 

Root cause and fix.                                

> 1void * calloc ( size_t nmemb , size_t size ) {
> 2if ( nmemb != 0&& size >SIZE_MAX /nmemb ) return NULL ;
> 3size_t total =nmemb *size ;
> 4/* ... rest unchanged ... */
> 5}

Summary. This case illustrates two complementary BMC-Agent mechanisms. First, the 

CEGAR refinement loop : the initial CBMC run finds a spurious loop-bound artifact; without refinement the pipeline either reports a false positive or misses the real bug entirely; spec refinement tightens the precondition, the CEGAR re-verification pass explores the arithmetic path, and the second run finds the genuine overflow. Second, Phase 1.5 flag selection : the LLM agent autonomously identifies calloc as requiring --unsigned-overflow-check (multiplication of two externally-supplied sizes) and enables it before the first BMC pass, allowing CBMC to detect the overflow directly in a single round. Both paths converge on the same CWE-190 root cause (absent nmemb * size overflow guard), and the finding is independently confirmed by a human-filed bug report (VibeOS issue #26). 20 A.4 Case Study 4 — stbtt buf get : Crafted-Font OOB Read Source. stbtt buf get in vendor/stb truetype.h reads n bytes from a stbtt buf by calling stbtt buf get8 in a loop. Each stbtt buf struct carries a data pointer, a cursor ,and a size field. The bounds check in stbtt buf get8 is cursor < size :Listing 5: stbtt buf get8 (stb truetype.h ).                       

> 1static stbtt_uint8 stbtt__buf_get8 ( stbtt__buf * b ) {
> 2if (b - > cursor >= b - > size ) return 0;
> 3return b - > data [b - > cursor ++]; /* OOB if size >real allocation */
> 4}

The size field is populated from values embedded in the CFF section of an OpenType font file. There is no check that size reflects the true allocation length of data .

Phase 1 — Specification generation. The spec agent inspects stbtt buf get and produces: 

• Precondition : valid(b) && b->cursor + n ≤ b->size && valid range(b->data, 0, b->size) 

— the buffer’s stated size must match the true allocation. 

• Postcondition : the returned value equals the n-byte big-endian integer starting at b->data[b->cursor] .The precondition explicitly requires b->size to be a sound upper bound on the backing allocation, an invariant the font parser never enforces. 

Phase 2 — BMC. CBMC finds a counterexample violating the precondition: 

cursor = 8 388 607 , size = 1 073 741 824 (1 GiB) The check cursor < size passes, but no allocation of 1 GiB backs data . The subsequent 

b->data[cursor] access is a heap out-of-bounds read. 

Phase 3 Stage 1 — Feasibility check. The call-graph scanner traces: 

ttf get glyph → stbtt GetCodepointBitmap → stbtt GetGlyphShape 

→ stbtt GetGlyphShapeT2 → stbtt run charstring → stbtt buf get ttf get glyph (in kernel/ttf.c ) is called on every character render. All font data comes from 

/fonts/Roboto/Roboto-Regular.ttf , loaded at boot. Classification: is real bug = True ,

system entry reached = True .

Phase 3 Stage 3 — Dynamic validation. The dynamic validator compiles a GCC harness that constructs a stbtt buf with data = NULL , cursor = 8388607 , size = 1073741824 and calls stbtt buf get . The harness produces SIGSEGV : the null data pointer dereference is the native equivalent of the OOB read. Tier: confirmed dynamic .

Phase 3 Stage 4 — Realism check. The realism agent rates the finding REALISTIC :        

> A crafted CFF font can set size to an arbitrarily large value while providing a much smaller backing allocation. The bounds check cursor < size passes, but data[cursor] reads beyond the real allocation. Since stb truetype is a font-file parser, external/untrusted input is the normal operating context.

Root cause and fix. The stbtt buf abstraction trusts the size field unconditionally. The fix requires stbtt cff index get and related index-construction sites to validate that the computed size does not exceed the outer buffer bounds before constructing a child buffer. 21 Summary. This case illustrates the attacker-controlled input path: a value read verbatim from an external file becomes the operand of a safety-critical bounds check. The LLM spec makes explicit that size must be sound; CBMC finds a witness immediately; dynamic validation confirms SIGSEGV. 

A.5 Case Study 5 — vfs lookup : Two Bugs, One Function Source. vfs lookup in kernel/vfs.c resolves a path string to a vfs node t . It normalises the input by splitting on / delimiters and rebuilding a canonical path: Listing 6: vfs lookup path normalisation ( kernel/vfs.c ).                                                                              

> 1char normalized [ VFS_MAX_PATH ]; /* VFS_MAX_PATH =256 */
> 2char * parts [32]; /* fixed depth limit */
> 3int depth =0;
> 45char * rest =fullpath ;
> 6char * token ;
> 7if (* rest == ’/ ’) rest ++;
> 8while (( token =strtok_r ( rest , " / " , & rest ) ) != NULL ) {
> 9if ( strcmp ( token , " .. " ) == 0) {if ( depth >0) depth - -; continue ; }
> 10 parts [ depth ++] =token ; /* no bounds check on depth */
> 11 }
> 12 for ( int i=0; i<depth ; i ++) {
> 13 strcat ( normalized , " / " ) ;
> 14 strcat ( normalized , parts [ i ]) ;
> 15 }

Two distinct vulnerabilities are present. 

Bug A — Stack buffer overflow via deep path. parts is declared with 32 entries. The loop body contains no check on depth before writing parts[depth++] . A path with 33 or more 

/-separated components (e.g., /a/b/c/ . . . /gg ) fits within the 256-byte VFS MAX PATH limit but overflows parts into adjacent stack memory, corrupting normalized , fullpath , or the return address. 

Bug B — strtok r misuse with non-ASCII input. The call pattern strtok r(rest, "/", &rest) reuses rest as both the input string and the save pointer on every iteration. The C standard requires the first argument to be NULL on calls after the first. Passing rest itself violates this contract. The counterexample exhibits path[0] = 0xAF (a non-ASCII byte): the tokeniser produces a token whose pointer does not point into fullpath , and the subsequent 

strcat(normalized, parts[i]) copies from an unexpected memory location. 

Phase 1 — Specification generation. The spec agent generates: 

• Precondition : null(path) || valid string(path) .

• Postcondition : null( \result) || (valid( \result) && \result->type ∈ {VFS FILE, VFS DIRECTORY }).Neither bug is ruled out by the precondition — a valid string can be 33 components deep, and 

strtok r misuse is an implementation defect, not a precondition violation. CBMC finds both through assertion checks generated for the callees strcat and strtok r .

Phase 2 — BMC. CBMC finds a counterexample violating vfs lookup.precondition instance.4 :

path[0] = 0xAF , path[1] = 0 , cwd path = "/" 

The trace shows strtok r returning a token pointer that does not point into fullpath , after which strcat copies from unrelated stack memory. 22 Phase 3 Stage 1 — Feasibility check. The call graph finds: 

kapi open → vfs open handle → vfs lookup kapi open is a system-entry point that accepts user-supplied path strings — a direct source of non-ASCII bytes or arbitrarily deep paths. Classification: is real bug = True , system entry reached = True .

Phase 3 Stage 3 — Dynamic validation. The dynamic validator could not compile a standalone harness for vfs lookup because the function reads global state ( cwd path , use fat32 ). The finding remains at the confirmed system entry tier. 

Phase 3 Stage 4 — Realism check. The realism agent rates the finding REALISTIC :  

> Any application that calls kapi open with a non-ASCII filename or with a deeply nested path (33+ components) triggers one of the two vulnerabilities. Both inputs are trivially constructible from user space. No special privileges or race conditions are required.

Root cause and fix. Bug A: add if (depth >= 32) break; (or better, make the limit configurable and return an error). Bug B: follow the standard strtok r contract — initialise a separate saveptr variable and pass NULL on subsequent calls. 

Summary. This case illustrates how a single CBMC run can surface multiple distinct vulner-abilities in one function. The stack overflow (Bug A) requires only a long path; the strtok r 

misuse (Bug B) requires a non-ASCII byte. Both are reachable from any process that opens a file, making them high-priority fixes. 

A.6 Additional Confirmed Findings 

The five case studies in §A.1–A.5 trace two findings from the run ( net get mac and kapi file size )in full detail and three further bug patterns—CEGAR-refined allocator overflow, crafted-font out-of-bounds read, and a multi-bug VFS function—using representatives drawn from earlier pipeline configurations. All three patterns recur in the current run: the malloc overflow (Table 1 #19) replays the allocator story; the sixteen stbtt * findings (#10–15, #21–28, #33–34) all involve crafted-font input; and vfs read (#30) instantiates the same family of system-entry stack-corruption seen in vfs lookup .Below we sketch eleven additional confirmed findings spanning the remaining modules and tiers; full per-bug artefacts (spec, harness, counterexample, classification, dynamic verdict) are avail-able at https://github.com/agentic-prover/aprover/tree/main/findings/vibeos_full_ check10 .

DMA — hal dma fb copy (confirmed dynamic, SIGABRT). A public DMA framebuffer-copy entry point takes (dst, src, width, height) with no validation of the size product. CBMC finds that width × height overflows when both are attacker-controlled (counterexample: 

width = 0x900000A0 , height = 16 , product wraps in 32-bit arithmetic), causing the subse-quent memcpy to silently corrupt unrelated memory. A GCC-compiled reproducer crashes with SIGABRT. 

HID input — mouse set pos (confirmed dynamic, SIGABRT). The kernel pointer-position update computes x ⋅ 32768 where x is a signed integer. CBMC’s --signed-overflow-check 

(enabled by the flag-selector for this function) finds the multiplication overflowing for any x > 65535 .Although the symbolic counterexample uses an extreme fb width = UINT MAX , the overflow occurs in the multiplication before fb width is consumed, so the trigger condition is independent of the screen geometry. 23 Time — hal get time us (confirmed system entry). The microsecond-conversion HAL routine divides by cntfrq el0 , the ARM generic-timer frequency register. On QEMU and some emulated hardware this register reads zero until set by firmware, triggering division by zero. CBMC finds the violation with no caller guard; reachable from boot. 

TTF — stbtt GetFontVMetrics (confirmed dynamic, SIGSEGV). The function reads vertical metrics at info->data + info->hhea + offset where info->hhea is the byte offset of the hhea table parsed out of the font file itself. CBMC finds an out-of-bounds dereference when hhea is set to a large value by a crafted font—an entire class of attacker-controlled-input faults that the upstream stb truetype library does not currently guard against. 

TTF — stbtt GetBakedQuad (confirmed dynamic, SIGSEGV). The character-quad lookup uses chardata[char index] with no upper bound on char index , which comes from caller-supplied character codes. For any glyph index outside the baked atlas range the resulting pointer addresses arbitrary memory, dereferenced as a struct. Confirmed SIGSEGV under the dynamic harness. 

USB HID — hal usb mouse poll (confirmed dynamic, SIGSEGV). The HAL polls the USB mouse and copies an HID report into a caller-supplied buffer via memcpy(report, ...) 

with no null guard on report . CBMC’s counterexample is immediate; the fault reproduces with SIGSEGV. As a public entry point, any driver invocation can trigger it. 

Memory — malloc (confirmed system entry). VibeOS ships its own kernel allocator. CBMC’s signed-overflow check finds that the size-class arithmetic inside malloc overflows for sufficiently large allocation requests, returning a chunk smaller than requested. This is the system-entry counterpart of the allocator-overflow family that Case Study 3 illustrates end-to-end. 

Font collection — stbtt GetNumberOfFonts internal (confirmed system entry). The collection-header parser dereferences the font buffer at offsets derived from the file with no length parameter and no upper bound, so a truncated or crafted font lets the dereference reach unmapped memory. No dynamic reproducer was built (reachable only by loading a crafted font through stbtt GetNumberOfFonts , a multi-step setup), but the static call chain to a system entry is confirmed. 

VFS — vfs read (confirmed system entry). The read syscall implementation does not validate fd or the user-supplied output buffer pointer before passing them down; CBMC finds a counterexample with fd = 0 and buf = NULL , reachable from kapi read . Although the symbolic counterexample uses extreme size /offset values, realistic exploitation needs only moderate values targeting an open file. 

ELF loader — elf process relocations (confirmed bmc). The relocation-processing loop iterates rela count times where rela count is read directly from the ELF section header. At the configured unwinding bound k = 4, CBMC reports an unwind-bound violation: a crafted ELF can declare an arbitrarily large relocation count, producing an effectively unbounded loop during kernel-module loading. Reachability to a system entry has not yet been traced, so the finding sits in confirmed bmc .24 WSOD renderer — wsod draw line (confirmed bmc). The white-screen-of-death debug renderer computes a loop bound of fb width - 40 . Because fb width is an unsigned 32-bit integer, any fb width < 40 (which arises during early framebuffer initialisation) wraps to a near-2 32 loop count, hanging the kernel inside an IRQ handler. 

Font encoding — stbtt CompareUTF8toUTF16 bigendian prefix (confirmed bmc). The big-endian UTF-16 prefix comparator decrements len2 by 2 per iteration with no parity check. An odd attacker-controlled len2 causes the signed comparison len2 > 0 to wrap around and the loop to run forever—a denial-of-service vector reachable via the font name-table strings. 

B Real-World OSS Evaluation 

To complement the VibeOS evaluation we sweep selected functions from mature, heavily-fuzzed open-source C libraries drawn from the OpenSSF Internet Bug Bounty corpus: jq 1.8.1, OpenSSL master, libcurl, libxml2 2.16.0, and protobuf upb. These targets probe two questions that VibeOS alone cannot: can the agent confirm real vulnerabilities in code that has already received extensive OSS-Fuzz coverage, and do its zero-finding sweeps constitute positive verification evidence on hardened parser surfaces. 

Setup. Same CBMC and LLM configuration as the VibeOS run, plus four real-world-OSS fea-tures: (a) --real-libc — the harness #include s the source .c file directly so CBMC’s frontend handles the glibc and project-internal type machinery, rather than the default Python-side cc -E 

expand-then-strip pipeline; (b) --strict-dsl — forces Phase 1 pre/post into single C boolean ex-pressions, preventing prose-mixed clauses from silently translating to inline comments and produc-ing vacuous verifications; (c) --enable-realism-check and --enable-dynamic-validation ;(d) per-function --object-bits auto-scaling for state-heavy parser files. The feedback loop is enabled so witness-pattern false positives are absorbed into permanent remediations during the sweep itself. 

Confirmed real bugs. Across all sweeps BMC-Agent confirmed two real bugs , both in jq. Neither finding duplicates a published jq CVE or GHSA. 

Clean-verify sweeps as positive evidence. A complementary outcome of the OSS sweeps is the number of functions that completed the entry-spec, BMC, classification, and realism phases without surfacing any realistic finding. On heavily-defended parser code, these clean verifications are positive paper-track evidence: the agent’s spec is tight enough to drive CBMC to a decisive result, and the realism stage filters out the residual artifacts. Highlights: 

• OpenSSL crypto/asn1/asn1 lib.c : 15 of 24 leaf functions verified clean, including every wire-format DER decoder ( asn1 get length , ASN1 get object , ASN1 object size ,

ASN1 put * , asn1 check infinite end ). The LONG MAX guard, sizeof(long) cap, and 

INT MAX>>7L shift guards in OpenSSL’s DER decoders all hold up to unwind bound 10. Zero real bugs — consistent with OpenSSL ASN.1 being a long-standing OSS-Fuzz target. 

• libxml2 pattern.c : all 54 functions verified (XPath pattern compiler). 

• libxml2 xpointer.c : 9 of 9 verified; the feedback loop auto-discovered the project invariant xmlMalloc != NULL && xmlRealloc != NULL && xmlFree != NULL during the sweep, converging the specs without manual intervention. 

• libxml2 schematron.c : 37 of 37 verified, with five additional project invariants auto-promoted by the feedback loop after ≥ 3 functions independently learned them. 25 • libxml2 encoding.c : 127 raw CBMC counterexamples reduced to zero confirmed bugs after the full pipeline. Twenty-two functions reached the realism check (15 unrealistic, 6 uncertain, 1 realistic); the single realistic verdict was a model artifact correctly recovered by the path-divergent-unwind detector ( §3.5) — the cited property fires on a symbolic path the exhibited witness does not traverse. 

• curl lib/curlx/strparse.c : 8 of 20 leaf parsers verified clean ( curlx str number ,

curlx str hex , curlx str quotedword , etc.). 

• protobuf upb wire reader: the pipeline runs end-to-end on the three leaf decoders; no real bugs (consistent with upb’s OSS-Fuzz coverage). 

False-positive triage. A small candidate set of LLM-rated realistic findings did not survive manual post-triage. The most representative is a libxml2 xmlBufGrowInternal candidate: BMC-Agent’s dynamic harness crashed (ASan SIGSEGV at a pointer subtraction), but the triggering struct state (content=NULL, contentIO=non-NULL, alloc=IO) turned out to be unreachable through any in-tree caller or public API — every libxml2 site that nulls content also nulls 

contentIO , so the inconsistent state can only arise via direct struct mutation outside libxml2’s API contract. Each such class observed during the sweeps was absorbed into a permanent agent remediation via the feedback-loop: witness-pattern auto-rejection in the realism stage (library-init globals NULL, path-divergent unwind, tagged-union stub disconnect), full source-file context in the realism prompt, allocator-family stub return contracts, library-init function-pointer overrides, and selective inlining of small file-local pure callees in place of LLM-generated stubs. 

C AI-Generated Rust: claudes-c-compiler 

To probe whether BMC-Agent generalises beyond C and to characterise the defect profile of LLM-generated code, we apply the agent to anthropics/claudes-c-compiler (CCC), a 50 000-line C compiler written entirely by Claude in Rust. CCC compiles real C sources, accepts and links ELF object files, and emits assembly for four targets (x86 64, i686, ARM, RISC-V). It is exactly the kind of production-shaped AI-generated codebase a verifier should be able to audit. 

Setup and pipeline extensions. The CCC sweep uses BMC-Agent’s Rust backend with Kani as the underlying BMC engine (in place of CBMC for C). Five capabilities new to this campaign are required for real-world Rust crates: (i) transitive callee closure during sibling-strip — without walking the call graph, mutually-recursive descent parsers ( eval add → eval mul → eval unary )lose indirectly-reached helpers to E0425; (ii) empty-Vec fallback for non-Arbitrary slice elements 

— the LLM-generated harness path [T; N] = kani::any() fails when T is a user-defined enum (e.g. ExprToken with &’static str variants); the fallback materialises an empty Vec<T> so the function still gets a verdict; (iii) Phase 1 functional-correctness specs alongside the defensive panic-class specs, encoding what a correct implementation should compute, not merely the absence of panics; (iv) old(EXPR) pre-state snapshot substitution in the harness generator, lifting verification logic’s pre-state operator into explicit let pre N = (EXPR); bindings before the call so state-mutating functions can be specified; (v) three-way bug classification — real bug /

latent / spurious — gated on threat model: under --threat-model security , a structural panic reachable through a pub fn is a real bug because attacker-controlled inputs cross the API boundary. 

Confirmed real bugs. BMC-Agent finds 25 real bugs in CCC under --threat-model security . The bug surface is concentrated in the boundary between externally-controlled bytes and CCC’s internal representation: ELF readers, ELF writers, the C preprocessor, DWARF unwind parsing. 26 • src/backend/elf/io.rs : 11 bugs — slice OOB on data[offset+N] byte readers ( read u16 ,

read u32 , read u64 , read i32 , read i64 ), usize overflow in the if off + N <= buf.len() 

bounds checks of byte writers ( w16 , w32 , w64 ), and structural panics in the phdr writers (wphdr , write phdr64 , write bytes ). 

• src/frontend/preprocessor/utils.rs : 4 bugs — slice OOB and usize overflow in byte-index helpers ( bytes to str , skip literal bytes , copy literal bytes raw , copy litera l bytes to string ). 

• src/backend/linker common/eh frame.rs : 4 bugs — duplicate-pattern LE byte read-ers/writers ( read u32 le , read i32 le , read u64 le , write i32 le ). Reachable from attacker-controlled .eh frame sections in input .o files. 

• src/backend/linker common/write.rs : 3 bugs — u64 overflow in align up 64 ’s val + align - 1 ; alloc::raw vec::capacity overflow in pad to ’s Vec::resize(target, 0) 

on extreme target ; usize overflow in write elf64 phdr at ’s offset arithmetic. 

• src/common/encoding.rs : 1 bug — slice OOB on decode pua byte ’s input[pos] .

• src/ir/analysis.rs : 1 bug — the Cooper-Harvey-Kennedy LCA walker intersect walks the dominator tree via finger1 = idom[finger1] but only guards idom[finger1] != usize::MAX for the entry values, not the iterates. A malformed IR with idom[n] == usize::MAX on a non-root node panics on the next step’s idom[usize::MAX] .

• src/common/types.rs : 1 functional-correctness bug in align up — the function uses 

checked add to prevent its own panic, but on overflow it silently returns offset un-changed, which may not be aligned. The defensive spec misses this entirely (no panic); Phase 1’s functional spec asserts result % align == 0 and Kani finds a CEx (e.g. 

align up(usize::MAX, 8) returns usize::MAX , which %8 = 7 ≠ 0). This is the first Phase 1 real find in the CCC sweep and the only bug in the 25 that the defensive workflow would miss. 

Pattern across all 25. Every one of the 24 defensive findings sits on the public-API boundary: a pub fn helper(bytes: &[u8], offset: usize, ...) that indexes bytes[offset+N] or arithmetics on offset + N with no bounds or overflow guard. Every existing in-tree caller maintains the implicit bounds invariant through surrounding parser-loop or header-validation logic, so no current code path triggers a crash. The functions are nonetheless attacker-callable through the public API: a crafted .c source file drives the preprocessor helpers; a crafted .o 

object file drives the ELF and DWARF readers; the linker stage crashes instead of returning a clean error. This is the canonical unenforced contract class. The precondition that would close each panic (offset + N ≤ data.len() , offset + align ≤ usize::MAX , etc.) is exactly the invariant every caller maintains independently. The match between BMC-Agent’s inferred safety condition and the caller-side invariants is independent validation that the spec is right rather than fabricated: random or wrong specs would not appear in caller code. 

Bounded functional equivalence. Beyond panic detection, Phase 1 functional specs let BMC-Agent establish positive correctness on several functions within the BMC unwind bound: 

• linker common/hash.rs::gnu hash : verified equivalent to the fold expression name.iter(). fold(5381u32, |h, &b| h.wrapping mul(33) .wrapping add(b as u32)) — the djb2-style ELF GNU hash — under arbitrary input bytes up to the slice bound. 27 • linker common/hash.rs::sysv hash : verified equivalent to the SysV ELF hash fold (shift, add, mask, conditional XOR). 

• linker common/write.rs::align up 64 : under the inferred precondition ( align a power of two and val + align does not overflow), Phase 1’s postcondition (result ≥ val) && (result - val < align) && (result % align == 0) verifies cleanly. 

• linker common/write.rs::write elf64 phdr , write elf64 shdr : verified to emit the 56-byte / 64-byte ELF64 program/section header byte layouts in little-endian. These are bounded functional-equivalence results rather than panic-freeness assertions, which is the verifier’s most powerful mode and the one a panic-only defensive workflow could not produce. 

Limits: spec fabrication on complex encodings. Phase 1 over-reports on functions where the LLM cannot reliably write a correct reference computation. On common/long double.rs 

(IEEE 80-bit / 128-bit floating-point emulation, 35 pub fn s), the LLM-generated functional specs disagreed with the implementation’s byte-layout convention (e.g. x87 80-bit infinity in a 16-byte slot), producing four spec-encoding-mismatch false positives in the unfiltered run. Two filters make this manageable: (a) a spec-evaluation-overflow filter catches CEx where the spec arithmetic itself overflows on Kani’s extreme inputs ( usize::MAX etc.), classifying those as spurious rather than real bug ; (b) the LLM realism check ( §3.5) reliably filters spec-encoding-mismatch false positives — all four long double candidates were verdicted unrealistic with high confidence when --enable-realism-check was active, reducing the post-filter count to zero on that file. Phase 1 thus needs to be paired with the realism check on domain-heavy functions; on pure arithmetic and algorithmic helpers the filter is rarely required. 

Latent classification under non-security threat models. Under --threat-model safety 

or functional , all 24 defensive CCC findings reclassify to latent : no current in-tree call site produces the trigger state, so they are hardening tasks rather than active crashes. The align up 

functional bug remains real bug under every threat model because its implementation violates its own implicit contract regardless of caller, not because of a public-API ingress. 

What this tells us about AI-generated Rust. Across 50 000 lines of LLM-generated Rust spanning a complete C compiler, the agent finds zero memory-safety bugs (Rust’s type system precludes that class) and zero observed logic bugs in the compiler proper (parser, semantic analysis, codegen, register allocation, IR passes all sweep clean within the agent’s reach). The 25 bugs all fit one anti-pattern: the LLM consistently writes byte-helper functions on the public API without precondition checks , while writing the callers correctly to maintain the invariants those helpers depend on. The codebase works end-to-end on well-formed input; it fails on adversarial or crafted input passed to the same public API. This profile is distinct from typical human-written compiler defects (logic errors, miscompilations) and reflects the LLM’s tendency to encode contracts implicitly at call sites rather than enforce them at function boundaries. 28