Title: Long-horizon autoformalization of a core theorem underlying MIP* = RE

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.19814v1

Published Time: Fri, 18 Sep 2026 00:57:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 72

Markdown Content:
# Long‑horizon autoformalization of a core theorem underlying MIP*=RE 

Sirui Lu 1,2, *, Ruixuan Deng 3, *, Yanqiao Zhu 4, Zhengfeng Ji 3

> 1

Max‑Planck‑Institut für Quantenoptik, Hans‑Kopfermann‑Straße 1, D‑85748 Garching, Germany 

> 2

Munich Center for Quantum Science and Technology (MCQST), Schellingstraße 4, D‑80799 Munich, Germany 

> 3

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 

> 4

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA 

*These authors contributed equally. 

Landmark mathematical formalizations have taken specialist teams years to complete. We present 

FormalFlow , a system that coordinates AI proving agents under human supervision to address state‑ ment drift and proof composition in long‑horizon formalization. Drawing on software engineer‑ ing principles and practices, it uses a shared blueprint to guide nested planning, proving and re‑ view loops. Agents strengthen verification and review throughout formalization. We completed a machine‑checked Lean 4 proof of the quantum soundness of the classical low individual‑degree test, a core theorem underlying MIP ∗ = RE. Developing the proof took 63 days; greater parallelism could further reduce this time. The final library contains 126,367 lines of Lean code, all generated by agents. The formalization corrects side conditions and intermediate errors while preserving the published final error bound under corrected assumptions. This work provides a verified founda‑ tion for quantum complexity and demonstrates a route to affordable verification of major research proofs by small teams. 

Correspondence: Zhengfeng Ji (jizhengfeng@tsinghua.edu.cn) 

Repository: https://github.com/LionSR/MIPStarRE 

# 1 Introduction 

Gaps in mathematical proofs can go unnoticed for years, even after peer review. Formalization has the po‑ tential to address this issue by translating each informal proof step into a proof term that can be verified by a proof assistant such as Lean, Isabelle, or Rocq. Large human‑led formalization projects have achieved land‑ mark results, including the Four‑Color Theorem [1], the Feit–Thompson Odd Order Theorem (over 150,000 lines of proof scripts, including supporting libraries) [2], the Kepler Conjecture (over 500,000 lines of proof scripts) [3], and the Liquid Tensor Experiment [4, 5]. These achievements required years of manual work and coordination. Artificial‑intelligence systems have now advanced automated theorem proving and aut‑ oformalization to the point where machine‑checked proofs can be produced on a far greater scale [6–12]. Recent results show that cutting‑edge models can formalize research‑level mathematics [13–15]. Concur‑ rent work on LeanMarathon also studies agent coordination for Lean autoformalization [16]. The central challenge for long‑horizon autoformalization is to bring a large, evolving codebase to a complete proof while retaining control of its mathematical structure. Successive agent calls can introduce duplicate constructions, competing representations, and layers of intermediate results that still depend on unproved steps. As these additions accumulate, later agents and the supervising mathematician can lose sight of how the partial results form a complete argument. The project can then stall despite its growing size. If its mathematical structure cannot be recovered, the accumulated code may have to be abandoned and the 1arXiv:2609.19814v1 [quant-ph] 17 Sep 2026 formalization restarted. Long developments therefore require repeated consolidation of useful results and an explicit account of what remains to be proved. We address this problem with FormalFlow , an autoformalization framework inspired by software‑ engineering principles. It coordinates agents through shared repositories, continuous integration, and code review [17, 18]. We distilled its reusable multi‑agent infrastructure into the open oh-my-formalization template, so that other formalization projects can adopt the same coordination machinery without rebuilding it from scratch. The shared repository holds the paper, the Lean codebase, proof‑gap notes, and an interactive blueprint [19]: a dependency graph and mathematical specification that maps each informal claim in the paper to its formal Lean declaration. FormalFlow connects task planning, proving, and review through nested loops (Figure 1), using the failures found during the work to improve subsequent checks. Human supervisors set milestones, resolve discrepancies between the paper and the formalization, and inspect the final definitions. 

FormalFlow coordinates formalization as an iterative process towards a fixed point: a complete formaliza‑ tion in which all dependencies compile, all statements represent the target mathematics accurately, and no open obligations remain. In each iteration, a multi‑agent system inspects the evolving repository against the paper and the blueprint, retains verified and reusable proofs, removes abandoned proof attempts, and records newly exposed obligations as issues. Clearly defined protocols for proof gaps and open obligations guide the iteration towards this fixed point. Current models still take shortcuts that compile without prov‑ ing the intended claim. The iterative process accommodates such deviations because each pass audits the revised repository and repairs errors left by the previous pass. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework by using it to formalize a central component of the MIP ∗ = RE theorem [20]. This theorem establishes that interactive proofs with two entangled provers can decide every recursively enumerable language and refutes Connes’ embedding conjecture [21]. The compo‑ nent we formalize is the quantum soundness of the classical low individual‑degree test (LIDT) [22], in which a referee checks whether two non‑communicating provers answer consistently with evaluations of a low‑ individual‑degree polynomial. Quantum soundness states that when the provers win with high probability, global measurements with polynomial outcomes describe their strategies. This test has a history that makes it a natural target for formalization. A proof gap in the low‑degree‑test analysis [23] affected the subsequent two‑player NP‑hardness result [24], quantum games PCP [25], NEEXP ⊆ MIP ∗ [26], and the original proof of MIP ∗ = RE [20, 27]. The LIDT is a weaker variant introduced in Ji et al. [22] to replace the LDT and recover the latter two results. The proof of MIP ∗ = RE therefore depends on the quantum soundness of LIDT. Our formalization is complete, contains no unproven placeholders ( sorry ), and uses only the standard ax‑ ioms of classical mathematics. The resulting library contains 126,367 lines of Lean across 337 files (Supple‑ mentary Appendix A). During this process, FormalFlow uncovered and repaired two errors in the published theorem statement and three in the intermediate error budget. We also provide a public development his‑ tory recording the failures, repairs, and changes to verification alongside the verified theorem and support‑ ing library. By reducing a hundred‑page formalization from years of specialist labour to weeks of super‑ vised agent work, this work opens the way to a fully verified proof of MIP ∗ = RE. More broadly, it shows that machine‑checked verification of major results in mathematics and theoretical computer science can move from a rare achievement to a realistic standard. 2Human decisions Set objectives Audit the final statement                 

> Proof‑gap protocol
> Decide whether to correct the paper, repair the proof, or close
> (a) Task planning
> Orchestrator handles one task at a time Todo list One task Next task
> (b) Review loop
> Review agents check each pull request before it merges Work session Compare with paper Merge Merged change: follow‑up issues become new tasks Findings send it back Gap note Approved correction returns to the task
> (c) Work session
> Task agents edit the proof until it compiles Read task record Edit proof Lean compiler Commit Compiler error: repair and retry A compiling proof still needs review
> (d) Check growth
> Review findings become new automated checks Observed failure Reviewed new check CI checks Run on relevant changes; report findings or block a change Humans AI agents Automated check (Lean compiler, CI) New failure pattern, observed at review Blocking gate where a check is deployed

Figure 1 | Three nested scales of work and one cross‑scale process. Rows (a)–(c) read from the largest scale to the smallest: (a) task planning, (b) the review loop, and (c) the work session, inside which the proof loop repeats until the proof compiles. The highlighted task expands into the review row, and the highlighted session expands into the work‑session row. In (a), the orchestrator takes one task at a time from the todo list; the follow‑up issues of a merged change become new tasks. In (b), review agents compare each pull request with the paper: findings send it back to the work session, and a passing request merges through a blocking gate. In (c), task agents read the task record and edit the proof; a failing compiler check sends the edit back, as the dashed retry arrow shows, and a passing one reaches the green, kernel‑checked commit, which still has to pass review. Human decisions bracket the sequence: humans set the objectives that seed the todo list and audit the final statement; when the proof and the paper disagree, a gap note goes to the proof‑gap protocol, where humans decide whether to correct the paper, repair the proof, or close, and an approved correction returns to the task. The bottom row, (d) check growth, is a separate process: failure patterns observed at review (red diamond) inform new checks, which are introduced through reviewed pull requests and run by continuous integration (CI) on relevant changes, where they may report findings before becoming blocking gates (magenta marks). Grey boxes are human decisions, orange boxes are AI agents, and dotted boxes are automated checks. 

# 2 Results 

We present two linked results. First, we introduce FormalFlow , a system that uses coding language mod‑ els to translate long informal mathematical proofs into verified Lean code. Second, we use it to formal‑ ize the quantum soundness theorem for the low individual‑degree test (LIDT) [22], a central result in the proof of MIP ∗ = RE [20]. The argument uses quantum information, non‑commutative polynomial identi‑ ties, Naimark dilations, semidefinite programming (SDP) duality, spectral graph expansion, and inductive pasting of local low‑degree approximations. Formalizing it demanded both mathematical work and coor‑ dination across the codebase. We formalized foundations absent from Mathlib, including state‑dependent distances between quantum measurements, finite‑dimensional SDP duality with complementary slackness, and bipartite Naimark dilations. We also tracked error propagation across dozens of inductive stages and combined thousands of intermediate lemmas. In turn, the composition failures and statement drift this 3work exposed guided the design of FormalFlow . We first describe the system and then present the com‑ pleted LIDT formalization. 

## 2.1 FormalFlow Framework 

FormalFlow is an autoformalization framework that coordinates proving agents on long mathematical for‑ malizations through nested feedback loops and a shared GitHub repository (Figure 1). Alongside the scripts that define FormalFlow , the repository stores the complete project record: its history, source paper, gap notes, Lean 4 codebase, and an interactive blueprint [19]. We distilled reusable parts of FormalFlow into the 

oh-my-formalization template and supporting tools (Supplementary Appendix H) for use in other mathe‑ matical formalization projects. 

FormalFlow addresses two related obstacles to long formalizations: composition and statement drift. Each agent has a finite context window and works on only part of the codebase, while work may pass between dif‑ ferent models, harnesses, and human users. The resulting components must nevertheless use compatible definitions, assumptions, and bounds. When a proof is difficult, its statement can drift towards an easier claim through added assumptions or a weakened conclusion, causing further issues for composition. 

FormalFlow coordinates distributed proving agents across four nested operational scales and an orthogonal governance loop (Figure 1). At the macro‑scale, task planning organizes the global proof into an interactive blueprint and GitHub issues, ensuring that agents only attempt lemmas whose mathematical prerequisites have been established. At the meso‑scale, an agent work session checks out a dedicated git branch for one task, develops code, and opens a pull request. Before any code merges, the review loop audits the formal declarations against the paper and blueprint, returning unfulfilled obligations to further work sessions. At the micro‑scale, within an individual work session, the agent executes an autonomous proof loop, repeat‑ edly querying compiler diagnostics and tactic states to repair syntax and local proof obligations. Finally, an orthogonal check‑growth process converts newly diagnosed defect patterns into automated continuous‑ integration linters and updated review prompts that run on every subsequent pull request (Supplementary Appendix D). This hierarchical coordination is necessary because compiler satisfaction does not imply mathematical progress. Within the fast inner proof loop, an agent can easily drive local error counts to zero by proving de‑ generate tautologies, strengthening hypotheses, or modifying declarations. During the LIDT formalization, this failure mode caused the repository’s sorry count to drop to one while 114 of the 283 blueprint declara‑ tions remained unformalized or mathematically disconnected (Supplementary Appendix B). Figure 2 traces these measures across the project: the placeholder count, the blueprint’s completion, the library’s size, and the proof‑gap notes, against the phases of the work. 

FormalFlow also includes a proof‑gap protocol for suspected disagreements between the formalization and the paper. When an agent encounters such a discrepancy while discharging an obligation, the protocol records it for human adjudication. Human supervisors decide whether to correct the paper, repair the formalization, or close the gap note without a change. Agents then implement the approved resolution and update the gap note and blueprint. Methods provides further details on how FormalFlow operates. 

## 2.2 A Complete Formalization for LIDT 

LIDT and its formalization. LIDT is a low‑degree test used in the proof of MIP ∗ = RE [20, 22]. In its quantum soundness analysis, a referee tests whether two non‑communicating provers who share quantum entanglement answer questions by evaluating a multivariate polynomial 𝑔 ∶ 𝔽 𝑚 𝑞 → 𝔽 𝑞 of individual degree at most 𝑑 . The referee samples questions according to one of three subtests chosen with equal probability (Figure 3): the axis‑parallel lines test, the self‑consistency test, and the diagonal lines test. Quantum sound‑ ness states that if a projective strategy on two finite‑dimensional Hilbert spaces succeeds with probability 

1 − 𝜀 , then there are global polynomial measurements 𝐺 A and 𝐺 B with two forms of approximate agreement. On average over points 𝑢 , evaluating Bob’s global polynomial at 𝑢 agrees with Alice’s point answer, and eval‑ uating Alice’s global polynomial agrees with Bob’s point answer. The two global polynomial measurements also agree with each other. 4Scaffolding Blueprint construction Proof filling Consolidation LIDT target adopted              

> (20 Mar)
> Review against the paper in place (late Apr)
> Last sorry closed
> (23 May)
> Automated checks tightened (1–16 May)
> 050 100 150 a
> k lines of Lean
> 0300 600
> 566 targets at the end Blueprint targets
> 0300 600
> b
> Declarations fully formalized not ready no leanok marker
> 050 100 150 149 (1 Apr) 1 (29 Apr) 0 from 23 May
> c
> sorry  count 7 Mar 2026 1 Apr 1 May 1 Jun 24 Jun
> 0510 15
> 25 notes opened 29 Apr to 12 Jun, all closed by 23 Jun
> d
> Open gap notes

Figure 2 | Two measures of progress, 7 March to 24 June 2026. The ribbon marks the four phases of the work and the events that separated them; dashed lines carry the phase boundaries through the panels. By the compiler’s measure ( c), the proof was nearly done seven weeks in: the sorry count rose to 149 on 1 April as the Lean skeleton was stubbed out, then fell to one by 29 April. By the blueprint’s measure ( b) it was not: that day 114 of 283 target declarations were still not ready (orange) and 240 carried no leanok marker (dashed magenta). The next three weeks went into statements and interfaces rather than placeholders. The blueprint grew to 681 targets ( a, dotted, right axis), the not‑ready count peaked at 293 on 8 May, and the proof‑gap notes ( d) appeared in exactly this window: none before 29 April, 13 open at once on 15 May, 25 by 12 June. The two measures met on 23 May, when the last placeholder closed and all 566 remaining targets were fully formalized (blue); consolidation then trimmed the library ( a, grey area, left axis) from a peak near 142k lines to 126k, and the blueprint from 668 to 566 targets, without changing the theorem. All 25 were closed by 23 June, the last two as repairs. Series are last values per day; Figure S2 traces the notes one by one. The proof of the soundness theorem [22] constructs this global measurement by induction on the number of variables 𝑚 . It reduces the 𝑚 ‑variate test to (𝑚 − 1) ‑variate instances by slicing along hyperplanes, applying self‑improvement, enforcing approximate commutativity, and pasting local polynomial measurements into a global operator (Figure 3c). Each inductive stage fixes the state space, measurement operators, and error bounds required by the next stage. 5The (𝑚, 𝑞, 𝑑) ‑low individual degree test. A referee interacts with Alice and Bob and samples 𝑢 ∈ 𝔽 𝑚 𝑞 uniformly. With probability 1/3 each, it performs: 

1. Axis‑parallel line. Choose a random coordinate direction 𝑖 and let ℓ = {𝑢 + 𝑡𝑒 𝑖 ∶ 𝑡 ∈ 𝔽 𝑞 }. One prover returns a degree‑ 𝑑 polynomial 𝑓 on ℓ; the other returns 𝑎 ∈ 𝔽 𝑞 at 𝑢 . Accept iff 𝑓(𝑢) = 𝑎 .

2. Self‑consistency. Both provers receive 𝑢 and return 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝔽 𝑞 . Accept iff 𝑎 = 𝑏 .

3. Diagonal line. Sample 𝑖 ∈ {1, … , 𝑚} uniformly, then 𝑣 ∈ 𝔽 𝑚 𝑞 uniformly with 𝑣 𝑖+1 = ⋯ = 𝑣 𝑚 = 0 . Let 

ℓ = {𝑢 + 𝑡𝑣 ∶ 𝑡 ∈ 𝔽 𝑞 }. One prover returns a degree‑ 𝑚𝑑 polynomial 𝑓 on ℓ; the other returns 𝑎 ∈ 𝔽 𝑞 at 𝑢 . Accept iff 

𝑓(𝑢) = 𝑎 .In both line tests, the two prover roles are assigned uniformly at random. 

(a) The three tests the referee performs.      

> 𝑥 1
> 𝑥 2
> Shared polynomial 𝑔
> Alice
> Prover Bob
> Prover
> Referee
> Line ℓ
> Point 𝑥 𝑓 = 𝑔| ℓ
> 𝑎 = 𝑔(𝑥) 𝑥 ∈ ℓ
> Accept if 𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑎

(b) An honest polynomial strategy. 

> Quantum information
> Consistency State‑dependent distance Related inequalities Expansion & variance Orthonormalization SDP slackness
> Self‑improvement
> Matrix Chernoff bound Commutativity lemmas
> Pasting
> Main induction on the number of variables
> Main formal theorem

(c) The proof architecture. 

Figure 3 | The low individual‑degree test and its formal proof. (a) The referee plays one of three tests with the two provers, Alice and Bob. (b) An honest strategy uses a shared polynomial 𝑔 : Alice returns 𝑓 = 𝑔| ℓ

and Bob returns 𝑎 = 𝑔(𝑥) . The referee accepts when 𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑎 ; the roles may be interchanged. The surface illustrates 𝑔 schematically; its domain is 𝔽 𝑚 𝑞 . (c) The Lean formalization combines a base layer of quantum‑ information inequalities with self‑improvement and pasting in the main induction. For a strategy accepted with high probability, quantum soundness gives question‑independent polynomial‑valued measurements whose evaluations approximately agree with the provers’ answers. The two measurements also give approx‑ imately consistent polynomial outcomes, even when the provers share entanglement. At the pinned snapshot (24 June 2026), the library contained 126,367 lines of Lean across 337 files. The li‑ brary contained no unproven placeholders, and an in‑kernel axiom audit confirmed that the development depends only on Lean’s standard foundational axioms (Supplementary Appendix A). One of the coauthors of the LIDT paper audited the top‑level theorem statements and gap resolutions against the published math‑ ematics [22]. Supplementary Appendix B reports gap resolution separately from proof completion. 

The discovered proof gaps. Formalizing the proof generated 25 gap notes, which record places where the formalization and the published proof did not initially agree (Supplementary Appendix B; Figure 2d). The paper‑gap log in Figure 4 collects these notes; the human adjudication branch in Figure 1 shows how they return to the proof work. Some notes led to corrections of the theorem statement or error budget when a proof obligation could not be closed as published; others led to repairs of the formalization. Each note is a repository file, cited below by issue number and, when an issue has several notes, by a short slug. Table S4 lists all notes. We classified the corrections to the published argument into three principal categories: (i) Error‑bound corrections : Much of the LIDT proof bounds approximation errors. Several bounds used incorrect arithmetic or misapplied an intermediate result. 6Table 1 | Classification of the 21,651 review comments and reports, one subcategory each. Shares are frac‑ tions of all 21,651 entries; follow‑up is counted in Supplementary Appendix F.                                      

> Review category Objects Share Mathematics and agreement with the paper 11,949 55.19%
> ▷Mathematical content 5,520 25.50%
> ▷Source and blueprint correspondence 3,742 17.28%
> ▷Semantic and API invariants 2,687 12.41%
> Exposition and library design 6,998 32.32%
> ▷Mathematical exposition 3,307 15.27%
> ▷Library architecture and API 2,059 9.51%
> ▷Reuse and maintainability 1,632 7.54%
> Audit and execution infrastructure 2,704 12.49%
> ▷Build, CI and review automation 1,064 4.91%
> ▷Reproducibility, security and environment 119 0.55%
> ▷Repository process and evidence 1,521 7.03%
> Total 21,651 100.00%

For example, a substitution step is printed as preserving its consistency error, although the proposi‑ tion it cites charges a loss. The repair required a sharper comparison at the sub‑measurement scale. The printed proof replaces the polynomial measurement 𝐺 A by 𝑄 A, the completion of its orthonor‑ malized sub‑measurement 𝑃 A, and carries the consistency error 𝜁 1 across unchanged, whereas the substitution proposition it cites adds the square root of the state‑dependent distance and gives 𝜁 1 +√𝜁 2.The formal proof compares 𝐺 A against 𝑃 A instead, where the square root is taken at the smaller scale 

100 𝜁 1/4 1 , and shows that completion cannot decrease the match mass, giving 𝜁 1 + 10 𝜁 1/8 1 (gap notes 1099, line‑169 loss and sharper fix; Supplementary Section C.5.1). In another example, completing an orthonormalized sub‑measurement adds an unstated 2 𝜁 1 term. After this term is absorbed into the cascade parameter, the completion error is 𝜁 2 = 200 𝜁 1/4 1 + 42 𝜁 1/8 1

rather than the printed coefficient 40 (gap note 904). These local repairs prevented the errors from propagating through the proof. (ii) Boundary‑case analysis : Formalization also required explicit treatment of boundary cases omitted from the informal argument. Gap note 422 shows that the printed conditions permit 𝑘 = 0 when 𝑑 = 0 ; the formal theorem requires 0 < 𝑘 . Similarly, gap note 930 (main‑induction‑successor‑coefficient) treats the 𝑚 = 1 boundary of the induction. (iii) Side‑condition handling : A typographical error changed a condition needed later in the proof. For example, the printed condition 𝑘 ≥ 𝑚𝑑 on the line‑sampling parameter is insufficient for the successor pasting stage, whose additive Chernoff bound requires 𝑘 ≥ 400 𝑚𝑑 (gap note 906). The formalized theorem incorporates all such corrections; its final conclusion is unchanged, and the test remains sound with the printed error expression under the tightened side conditions. 

Role of code reviews. Automated review played an important role in the LIDT formalization. The review corpus contains 21,651 comments and reports retrieved on 27 July 2026 across 1,904 closed pull requests (Table 1). Supplementary Appendix F gives the corpus construction, classification method, and sensitivity analysis. Under the default classification, mathematics and agreement with the paper formed the largest 7category (55.2%). This category remained the largest under the alternative tie‑breaking rules in Supplemen‑ tary Appendix F. 

Shortcut patterns and self‑evolution. During the LIDT formalization, we observed shortcuts that passed the Lean checker without establishing the intended intermediate claim. Such shortcuts impede long for‑ malizations by causing statement drift and composition failures. Review and integration exposed three patterns: (i) Tautological aliases : In rewriting the Laplacian, an early draft defined 𝐿 diff ≔ 𝑀 −1 𝐼−𝐾 directly, reducing an algebraic identity that required spectral graph analysis to syntactic reflexivity ( 𝑥 = 𝑥 ). (ii) Vacuous witnesses : In rounding to projectors, an early witness chose the projection [1] on a one‑ dimensional carrier, establishing no state‑dependent closeness to the supplied measurement on its original carrier. (iii) Conclusion inlining : In the self‑improvement stage, an early draft accepted properties derived from semidefinite programming as auxiliary hypotheses in the theorem signature through a SelfImprove-mentBridgePackage .Each shortcut initially passed the compiler. Review identified each departure, and a complete proof of the corresponding mathematical claim in the paper replaced the shortcut (Supplementary Appendix B catalogs these across the ten blueprint chapters). Replaying the proof‑debt scanner over the repository history traces how these patterns accumulated and were removed. The number of flagged statements with unproved helper obligations, circular dependencies, or conclusion‑shaped hypotheses increased from 1 to 63 between 22 March and 6 May 2026. The count fell to zero on 11 May, when the scanner became a blocking continuous‑integration check, and remained at zero thereafter. These detections surfaced through different channels. Automated review identified the one‑dimensional rounding witness on the introducing pull request, but it was still merged; an issue then tracked the repair. The conclusion‑shaped induction hypothesis was likewise flagged before merge, when no blocking scanner for that pattern yet existed. Once checks blocked changes, the inspected failures showed concrete repairs: one proof‑debt failure led to a corrected Lean/blueprint boundary, and five marker failures led to corrected declaration documentation. Supplementary Appendix D gives the inspected cases and their coverage. To prevent autonomous agents from evading verification by weakening CI linters, such as when an agent attempted to whitelist sorry in continuous integration (Supplementary Appendix D), all modifications to test harnesses and agent instructions required the same agent review. 

# 3 Discussion 

This work shows that long‑horizon autoformalization of a complete research proof is feasible in an agent‑ intensive, human‑supervised setting. We formalized the quantum soundness of the classical low individual‑ degree test, including corrections to the published statement and intermediate error bounds [22]. Under human supervision, the models produced all the Lean code through repeated interaction with compiler feedback. Completing such a proof, however, requires more than resolving compiler errors. Lean checks that a proof establishes its stated theorem, but not whether that theorem captures the intended mathemati‑ cal meaning of the corresponding result in the paper. As a formalization grows, we must therefore manage drift in Lean statements, definitions, and interfaces by repeatedly comparing intermediate declarations with the blueprint and the paper. This distinction between a checked component and its intended mathematical role also explains why track‑ ing the count of unresolved sorry placeholders is an unreliable measure of progress toward the full theo‑ rem. In automated proving, agents can rapidly eliminate placeholders by strengthening premises, weak‑ ening conclusions to tautologies, or decoupling definitions from the global theorem. During our project, the repository’s sorry count first dropped to one while 114 of the 283 declarations tracked by the blueprint were not yet fully formalized (Supplementary Appendix B). A component can compile without error while 8leaving its essential mathematical obligation buried in an auxiliary hypothesis or exposing an interface that downstream arguments cannot use. Resolving these discrepancies requires following the complete de‑ pendency chain and revising compiler‑accepted components until their assumptions, representations, and conclusions support the complete proof (Supplementary Appendix C). These recurring defects prompted continuous adaptation of FormalFlow itself. Humans established the ini‑ tial roles, skills, review procedures, and validity gates. As agents and human auditors identified recurring failure modes, they proposed countermeasures and implemented targeted audits or stronger gates in re‑ sponse (Supplementary Appendix D). FormalFlow therefore evolved alongside the formalization. This expe‑ rience suggests that oversight in long‑running agent systems may need to adapt as new failures emerge [28, 29]. The majority of our formalization work was completed in April and May 2026. Since then, stronger models, larger formalizations such as Erdos90 [30], and research advances accompanied by Lean certificates [15] have expanded the scope of machine‑checked mathematics. As these developments expand autoformal‑ ization, our documented failures and repairs provide practical precedents for organizing, reviewing, and repairing large formalization codebases. The verified quantum soundness of the low individual‑degree test and its supporting library establish the foundation for completing the full formalization of MIP ∗ = RE [20] and provide the analytic machinery required for the subsequent verification of Pauli‑basis testing. 

# 4 Methods 

We describe how FormalFlow stores the state of the LIDT formalization and coordinates work across its four nested scales. 

Blueprint, repository, and memory. Each fresh session reads the relevant paper text, blueprint nodes, Lean code, gap notes, project instructions, and a memory store. Individual language‑model sessions carry no memory across invocations, so the shared GitHub repository maintains the complete project state (Sec‑ tion 2.1). The project documentation and memory directory provide persistent instructions and conven‑ tions that every session reads afresh, regardless of which model or agent runs it. The directory also contains 147 dated audit and session reports, which agents retrieve by file name. Starting from the primary L ATEX paper, human supervisors consult with agents to establish the initial struc‑ tural decomposition in an interactive blueprint [19]. They also construct a corresponding Lean skeleton of namespaces, definitions, and unproven theorem signatures. As the formalization progresses, we instruct an orchestrator agent to split broad blueprint statements into intermediate lemmas and add obligations for missing steps and unstated prerequisites. Every paper‑facing Lean declaration links to a blueprint state‑ ment, and every blueprint statement links to a specific claim in the paper. These links support claim‑by‑ claim comparison. The blueprint thus provides a shared data structure that language‑model agents can read and maintain. Unlike the rigid data structures of traditional programs, it represents the proof structure in natural‑language L ATEX. In the ideal case this scaffolding would simplify the work to formalizing all the state‑ ments of the paper and leaving the proofs to be filled in. Finding definitions that are correct and mutually compatible is, however, itself a non‑trivial task and part of the formalization process. 

Task generation and organization. We organize proof obligations as GitHub issues. Tracking issues cover chapters of the original paper and theorem families; GitHub’s native sub‑issue links record individual proof tasks (Figure 1). We build the workflow around GitHub’s native pull‑request, issue, and Actions infrastruc‑ ture. Pretrained language models exhibit strong proficiency with standard software‑engineering tools, mak‑ ing native repository infrastructure an effective substrate for asynchronous multi‑agent coordination with‑ out centralized scheduling bottlenecks. It also makes the formalization transparent and easy to audit: exter‑ nal readers can inspect every task, review discussion, and code change through standard public interfaces. Agents open proof‑task issues as work progresses. Issue workflows classify eligible new issues and sup‑ ply Mathlib scouting reports for eligible formalization tasks. With post‑merge tracking enabled, the issue 9tracker examines merged changes and discussions for newly exposed proof obligations. It creates follow‑ up issues, attaches them to the relevant open tracker, and recommends a next task whose prerequisites are resolved. A separate weekday workflow summarizes proof activity and open problems. Section E.4 de‑ scribes these workflows during the formalization. The repair of the mathematical pasting step in Results is an example of the feedback from review to new proof tasks shown in Figure 1. 

The formalization session. We use TeXRA, Claude Code, OpenCode, and Codex to work on proof tasks in the shared repository. TeXRA’s multi‑agent system, described in our earlier work [31], allows independent tasks to proceed concurrently, including in separate worktrees. Sections E.9 and E.10 report the recorded agent contributions and the breakdown of model usage. The agent selects an open issue whose prerequisites are resolved and follows the repository’s standing in‑ structions (Section E.1). A session begins with the paper. The standing instructions set the reading order: first the paper, then the blueprint node, and finally the Lean files. They require agents to document the mathematical proof strategy from the paper before attempting formal tactics, preventing the introduction of ad‑hoc shortcuts. Before attempting a proof, agents search Mathlib and the codebase for existing lemmas. Dedicated scouting sessions post reports that subsequent proof sessions read before attempting the proof. The instructions favour small lemmas that can be reused and composed. A session that modifies a paper‑ labelled theorem concludes with a statement integrity audit that compares its assumptions and conclusions directly with the paper. The session also synchronizes the blueprint markers in the same change and pro‑ duces a pull request in the required format. A proving session thus transitions from an assigned issue to a local worktree, generates the required lemmas and blueprint annotations, and submits an auditable pull request. 

Tool loops, autonomous goals, and stopping criteria. Proving sessions operate autonomously toward an approved mathematical obligation with a strict stopping condition. The agent iteratively explores proof tactics, searches Mathlib, and inspects compiler diagnostics. When the agent becomes idle, a continuation prompt returns it to that target objective. Execution terminates when either the target declaration compiles cleanly under lake env lean without sorry placeholders or unapproved axioms, or an iteration budget is exhausted, escalating the task for human review. Section E.7 details these procedures and the continuation prompt. The repository instructions require the agent to type‑check the edited file with lake env lean and scan it for  

> sorry

and axiom . Changes affecting imports or shared declarations also require lake build . Declarations that retain sorry tokens cannot mark a blueprint node complete and remain tracked as open proof debt. The agent reports its verification through the planning tool; statement review then checks that the proof discharged the intended obligation rather than an auxiliary shortcut. 

Review and integration. Each worktree uses the Lean toolchain [32] and Mathlib [33]. Every pull request undergoes a multi‑layer verification gate before merge. First, continuous integration runs full compilation (lake build ) and the kernel axiom audit ( Lean.collectAxioms ), verifying that the code compiles and de‑ pends strictly on approved axioms. Separate workflows check blueprint and source integrity (Supplemen‑ tary Appendices A and D). Second, automated review agents evaluate proposed Lean changes for mathe‑ matical fidelity against the paper, the blueprint, and the library architecture. We couple these checks to automated repair workflows in GitHub Actions. When a build or blueprint check fails, GitHub Actions dis‑ patches a repair agent with compiler diagnostics to resolve the failure directly on the pull‑request branch. When review comments identify actionable discrepancies, the repair agent addresses unresolved threads under maintainer authorization. Repair prompts (Supplementary Appendix G) enforce local verification before pushing and require agents to isolate mathematical obstructions rather than weaken statements. To prevent infinite repair loops and runaway token expenditure, automated repairs are restricted to a safety cap of five consecutive commits before halting for human review. Section E.6 details the triggers, termina‑ tion rules, and an audited repair sequence. When concurrent branches conflict, an automated integration agent rebases the pull request in a dedi‑ cated worktree, resolves syntactic and semantic conflicts, and verifies full compilation before merging. 10 Paper          

> Frozen L ATEX
> Blueprint
> 181 nodes
> Lean code
> 126,367 lines
> Paper‑gap notes
> 25 notes
> Prompts, scripts, automated checks
> Shared repository
> Transcribe Formalize and prove
> Open proof tasks
> GitHub issues
> Pull requests
> Proposed edits
> Merge
> Reviewed changes
> Authors
> Steer and assess gaps Issue‑tracking agents organize follow‑up tasks Task agents prove and submit edits
> Independent checks Meaning: review agents Validity: Lean kernel
> Compare statements with Check proofs and audit axioms the blueprint and paper 296 axiom assertions Check results Agents document deviations from the paper Agents may propose changes to prompts and checks
> Frozen paper Changes require review Kernel‑checked Agents may modify Authors Shared repository Stacked cards: concurrent tasks or pull requests

Figure 4 | The FormalFlow workflow. Task agents work on open proof tasks and submit their changes as pull requests. Issue‑tracking agents organize follow‑up proof obligations. Review agents compare statements with the blueprint and paper; Lean checks proofs and the axiom audit checks their dependencies. These checks run independently, according to the files changed: Lean and build changes trigger compilation and the axiom audit, while changes to Lean, blueprint, gap notes, or project instructions trigger review. Agents merge reviewed changes under the project instructions; authors steer the work and assess mathematical gaps. Agents document deviations from the paper in separate paper‑gap notes. They may also propose changes to prompts, scripts, and automated checks through pull requests. The review prompt is read from the base branch, so a proposed prompt edit does not govern its own review. Section E.9 reports the agent markers recorded in commit metadata. Edits to standing instructions, re‑ view prompts, and continuous‑integration scripts follow the same pull‑request review process. To ensure evaluation integrity, automated review workflows load their prompts from the repository’s protected base branch, ensuring that a proposed prompt edit cannot govern its own review. Build and review workflows run independently on the changes each covers. 

The proof‑gap protocol. Sometimes the printed claim itself is wrong. When an agent cannot reconcile a proof obligation with the paper, it files a standardized L ATEX gap document specifying the paper passage, the failing obligation, the mathematical cause, a proposed correction to the formalization or the paper, the downstream consequences, and the final repair. Each document registers one of three decisions: (a) correcting the paper’s mathematics, where the formal statement adopts the repaired bound or tightened hypothesis (such as the 400 𝑚𝑑 side condition or the degree‑ 0 pasting construction), an erratum note is recorded, and downstream dependencies adjust to the repaired interface; (b) repairing the formalization, where the Lean encoding was defective (such as unnormalized state scaling or an ungrounded carrier witness) and is rewritten to match the paper’s intended mathematical object; or (c) closing without modifi‑ cation, where the perceived discrepancy is resolved as an artifact of notation or an alternative formalization path, leaving both the paper and formal statements unchanged. Affected declarations and all dependent theorems carry metadata markers linking to the gap document until the gap is resolved. Supplementary Appendix B details the dated gap notes and statement trajectory from first compiler‑accepted versions to the verified theorem. 11 Auditing and discrepancy resolution. During major repair phases, maintainers run a comprehensive audit instruction across the repository. Each pass scans the formal declarations against the blueprint and the paper, detects unproved bridge scaffolding or unfaithful hypotheses, and records the remaining obligations as issues for further work. The next pass examines the revised statements and their dependencies under the same audit instruction. This iterative process continues until an audit pass identifies no new discrepancies: the statements agree with the paper and any approved corrections, their proof obligations are discharged, and the Lean checks pass. Supplementary Appendix G reproduces the instruction and the defect taxonomy used for this process. 

Automated checks. We catalogue recurring failure patterns and use them to revise review instructions and add automated checks for subsequent changes. Automated review agents continue to look for failures outside existing static checks. For example, review agents found an intermediate theorem whose auxil‑ iary hypotheses supplied variance bounds that the paper does not assume; an automated repair pull re‑ quest (PR #1466) restored the paper’s statement and left the missing step as a tracked obligation, which a subsequent session proved (PR #1496). In the induction section, PR #1664 aligned the interface of the self‑improvement lemma with the published paper and prevented the theorem from being marked com‑ plete while an underlying dependency remained open. We then added a transitive proof‑status check to continuous integration. The check fails any pull request that marks a result complete while any transitive dependency contains open proof debt. Static audits provide further evidence of agreement: paper‑facing docstrings cite the exact lines formalized, linters check that gap notes follow their templates, and custom scripts flag conclusion‑shaped hypotheses, unlinked declarations, and redundant helpers (Supplementary Appendix D). 

Checking the completed proof. The compiler and an in‑kernel axiom audit decide validity. The build workflow audits the kernel’s axiom environment with 68 standard‑axiom assertions and 228 no‑unproven‑ step assertions. The completed build contains no unfinished proofs, and the main theorem depends strictly on the three standard axioms of classical mathematics ( propext , Classical.choice , and Quot.sound ) (Sup‑ plementary Appendix A). A standalone comparator repository certifies that the formalized theorem state‑ ment matches the certified target. Because the Lean kernel cannot check whether this target faithfully captures the theorem in the paper, a coauthor of the LIDT paper [22] and our team audited the top‑level the‑ orem and its dependent definitions against the paper, unfolding definitions down to Lean primitive types to check for weakened statements and unintended auxiliary assumptions. The repository metrics in Table S11 describe the library at proof completion (24 June 2026) under Lean toolchain v4.31.0. 

# Data availability 

The data supporting the findings of this study are available in the public MIPStarRE GitHub repository. The main‑theorem proof was completed in May 2026. Library integration and statement alignment continued in June, including removal of the legacy same‑space route and proof of a heterogeneous sub‑measurement consistency lemma (Supplementary Appendix B). The MIPStarRE repository also contains the interactive blueprint and the gap notes. 

# Code availability 

The Lean proof and supporting library are available in the MIPStarRE repository. The reported library measurements use snapshot b39705 and Lean 4 v4.31.0; Supplementary Appendix A gives the build and verification instructions. The formalization is registered in the Palomar Registry as PALOMAR‑2026‑08‑18‑ 000001: the registry re‑checks the proofs with Lean from its registered source and publishes the exact state‑ ment ( MIPStarRE.LDT.Test.mainFormal ), the libraries it uses, and the review’s comments. The registered source is the companion comparator repository, which certifies that the library’s main theorem matches the registered target statement. 12 AI disclosure. The Lean 4 code and the blueprint have been fully generated by the multi‑agent AI system we developed under our supervision. We used LLM‑based tools for editing parts of the manuscript text and figures; all scientific content was checked by the authors, who take responsibility for it. 

# Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

# Acknowledgements 

We thank Thomas Vidick for suggesting to organize a comparator and Challenge.lean for the Lean formal‑ ization. We thank the Palomar team for building the registry. This work is partially supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2023YFA1009403), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12347104), and Beijing Science and Technology Planning Project (Grant No. Z25110100810000). The work is partially supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strat‑ egy – EXC‑2111 – 390814868. This research is part of the Munich Quantum Valley, which is supported by the Bavarian state government with funds from the Hightech Agenda Bayern Plus. 13 Supplementary Information 

A The formal theorem and its verification 16 

A.1 The formal statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 A.2 The error parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 A.3 Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 A.4 Checking the completed proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 A.5 Software configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 A.6 Reproducing the checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 

B Trajectory of the formal statements 19 

Structure, notation, and color conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 B.1 Three worked trajectories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 B.2 Timeline of formal transitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 B.3 Ten‑chapter formalization milestones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 B.4 The blueprint as a measure of progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 B.5 The 25 gap notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 

C Cross‑module composition in the inductive proof 31 

C.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 C.2 Case study I: register placement, role symmetrization, and self‑consistency . . . . . . . . . . 33 C.3 Case study II: assembling self‑improvement and reindexing its bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 C.4 Case study III: semidefinite duality and the false assumption 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 C.5 Case study IV: consistency under rounding and completion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 C.6 Case study V: rerandomization graph Laplacian and centered variance trace . . . . . . . . . . 38 C.7 Case study VI: interpolation support and degree‑zero pasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 C.8 Case study VII: pasting telescoping sum and inductive successor arithmetic . . . . . . . . . . 40 C.9 Index of theorem inputs and outputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 

D Verification tools and proof integrity checks 43 

D.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 D.2 Checks 1 and 2: hypothesis and proof‑debt scanners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 D.3 Check 3: helper structure reviews and scaffolding removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 D.4 Check 4: kernel axiom audits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 D.5 Check 5: blueprint synchronization and declaration checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 D.6 Mathematical review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 D.7 Measuring the checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 14 E GitHub task tracking, agent contributions, and model usage 49 

E.1 From proof decomposition to session instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 E.2 Tracking proof tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 E.3 From body checklists to native sub‑issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 E.4 Issue creation and organization through GitHub Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 E.5 Pull‑request links and task decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 E.6 Automated pull‑request repair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 E.7 Tool loops, goal mode, and proof‑task completion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 E.8 Codebase metrics and project timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 E.9 Account attribution and agent commit contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 E.10 Model token usage and accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 

F The review dataset 63 

F.1 Population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 F.2 Reading and classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 F.3 Examples of review findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 

G Prompt for auditing and repairing the formalization 68 H Tools distilled for new formalizations 70 

We organize the supplementary material around the completed theorem, the mathematical changes needed to prove it, and the procedures used to check and coordinate the work. Supplementary Appendix A states the formal theorem and explains how to verify it. Supplementary Appendix B traces the changes from early formal statements to their corrected forms. Supplementary Appendix C then examines how the corrected lemmas fit together in the inductive proof, with particular attention to their hypotheses, operator represen‑ tations, and error bounds. Supplementary Appendix D describes the automated checks and mathematical review used to detect unproved obligations and departures from the intended statements. Supplementary Appendix E records how proof tasks were organized and documents agent contributions and model usage. Supplementary Appendix G reproduces the prompt used to audit and repair the codebase when formal state‑ ments had departed from the paper. Finally, Supplementary Appendix H describes the template and tools distilled from this work for use in new formalizations. 15 A The formal theorem and its verification 

## A.1 The formal statement 

Using our multi‑agent formalization pipeline under human supervision, we verified the quantum soundness of the classical low individual‑degree test (LIDT) [22] used in answer reduction toward MIP ∗ = RE [20]. The theorem and proof statistics refer to the MIPStarRE revision specified below. The comparator checks use a later revision. Provers that pass the test with high probability must use strategies close to global polynomial measurements whose evaluations agree approximately with their point answers and with each other. The formal statement applies to any projective strategy on any pair of finite‑dimensional Hilbert spaces. It has the conclusion and error bound printed in the paper, with two corrected side conditions. Here 𝑚 denotes the number of variables, 𝑑 the individual‑degree bound, 𝑞 the field size, and 𝜀 the soundness error. The printed condition 𝑘 ≥ 𝑚𝑑 becomes 𝑘 ≥ 400 𝑚𝑑 in the formal proof, and at 𝑑 = 0 , where the printed condition permitted 𝑘 = 0 , the formal theorem requires 0 < 𝑘 . The final error term is 

𝜈 = 100000 𝑘 2𝑚 4 (𝜀 140000 + (𝑑/𝑞) 140000 + exp (−𝑘/(2560000 𝑚 2))) , (S1) where 𝑘 is a free integer parameter in the analysis. Figure S1 places the printed and formal statements side by side. 

Informal soundness statement. Consider a projective strategy (𝜓, 𝐴 A, 𝐵 A, 𝐿 A, 𝐴 B, 𝐵 B, 𝐿 B)

that passes the (𝑚, 𝑞, 𝑑) ‑low individual de‑ gree test with probability at least 1 − 𝜀 . Let 

𝑘 ≥ 𝑚𝑑 be an integer and 𝜈 be defined as in Equation (S1). Then there are projective measurements 𝐺 A, 𝐺 B ∈ PolyMeas (𝑚, 𝑞, 𝑑) 

such that: 1. Consistency with 𝐴 . On average over u ∼𝔽 𝑚 𝑞 ,

𝐴 A,𝑢 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐼 ≃ 𝜈 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐺 B

> [𝑔(𝑢)=𝑎]

,𝐼 ⊗ 𝐴 B,𝑢 𝑎 ≃𝜈 𝐺 A 

> [𝑔(𝑢)=𝑎]

⊗ 𝐼. 

2. Self‑consistency. 

𝐺 A 

> 𝑔

⊗ 𝐼 ≃ 𝜈 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐺 B 

> 𝑔

.

(a) Informal statement.                                                                            

> theorem mainFormal (params :Parameters )[FieldModel params.q] ι{A ιB :Type *} [Fintype ιA] [ DecidableEq ιA] [Fintype ιB] [DecidableEq ιB] (strategy :ProjStrat params ιA ιB) (eps :Error )(hpass : strategy.PassesLowIndividualDegreeTest eps) (k :ℕ)
> --paper prints k≥md
> (hk : 400 * params.m *params.d ≤k)
> --absent from the paper
> (hk0 : 0 < k) :∃ G_A : ProjMeas (Polynomial params) ιA,∃ G_B : ProjMeas (Polynomial params) ιB,
> ConsRel strategy.state (uniformDistribution (Point params)) (IdxProjMeas .toIdxSubMeas strategy.pointMeasurementA) (polynomialEvaluationFamily params G_B.toSubMeas) (mainFormalError params keps) ∧
> ConsRel strategy.state (uniformDistribution (Point params)) (polynomialEvaluationFamily params G_A.toSubMeas) (IdxProjMeas .toIdxSubMeas strategy.pointMeasurementB) (mainFormalError params keps) ∧
> ConsRel strategy.state (uniformDistribution Unit )(constSubMeasFamily G_A.toSubMeas) (constSubMeasFamily G_B.toSubMeas) (mainFormalError params keps)

(b) Formal statement. 

Figure S1 | The soundness theorem in two forms. (a) The statement printed in the paper [22]. (b) The statement that the Lean kernel has checked. Each hypothesis and each conclusion on the left has a formal counterpart on the right, including the error bound. The comments on the right mark two corrected side conditions: the formal theorem requires 𝑘 ≥ 400 𝑚𝑑 where the paper prints 𝑘 ≥ 𝑚𝑑 , and it requires 0 < 𝑘 ,which the paper omits. 16 A.2 The error parameters 

Table S1 lists the error bounds used in pasting and the final proof. Intermediate parameters 𝜈 1–𝜈 3 (rep‑ resenting base‑case line and plane consistency errors) are absorbed into the inductive step bound 𝜈 5. We write 𝐸 ≔ 𝜀 1/32 + 𝛿 1/32 + 𝛾 1/32 + 𝜁 1/32 + (𝑑/𝑞) 1/32 . We highlight the corrected expressions and display the printed values alongside them. The corrected 𝜈 8 still satisfies 𝜈 7 + 𝜈 8 ≤ 𝜈 at the pasting stage. In the final proof, the corrected completion error 𝜁 2 and the error from the operator substitution in Section 5 of the LIDT paper [22] contribute to 𝜁 repaired  

> 4

, which is bounded by the final error in Equation (S1). 

Table S1 | The error parameters of the proof. The final error in Equation (S1) bounds the accumulated errors. Here 𝐸 = 𝜀 1/32 + 𝛿 1/32 + 𝛾 1/32 + 𝜁 1/32 + (𝑑/𝑞) 1/32 . In the final‑assembly rows, 𝜎 is the induction error for the symmetrized (3𝜀, 3𝜀, 3𝜀) ‑good strategy; in the last row it denotes the output of one pasting step. The paper reuses the letter 𝜈 at three scales: the pasting‑stage 𝜈 of the last row, the induction er‑ ror 𝜈 = 1000𝑘 2𝑚 2(𝜀 1/1024 + 𝛿 1/1024 + 𝛾 1/1024 + (𝑑/𝑞) 1/1024 ) that absorbs it, and the final error of Equation (S1). Sections C.5.1 and C.8.1 derive the corrected 𝜁 2 and 𝜈 8. Section C.5.1 gives the repaired point‑consistency bound and shows how the final error bound includes it. 

Parameter Defined in Expression or bound Absorbed into 

𝜀 Test definition (good strategy) Axis‑parallel lines test fails w.p. ≤ 𝜀 𝜁 ; 𝜈 5–𝜈 7; 𝜈 𝛿 Test definition (good strategy) Self‑consistency test fails w.p. ≤ 𝛿 𝜁 ; 𝜈 5–𝜈 7; 𝜈 𝛾 Test definition (good strategy) Diagonal lines test fails w.p. ≤ 𝛾 𝜈 4–𝜈 8; 𝜈 𝜁 Self‑improvement (helper lemma) 

100𝑚 (𝜀 1/2 + 𝛿 1/2 + (𝑑/𝑞) 1/2 ) The pasting hypotheses; 𝜈 4–𝜈 8

𝜁 1 Final assembly (symmetrized pair) 

2𝜎 + 2√3𝜀 + 2𝜎 + 𝑚𝑑/𝑞 𝜁 2; 𝜁 3; 𝜁 repaired 

> 4

𝜁 2 Final assembly (completion) 

200𝜁 1/4 1 + 42𝜁 1/8 1

(printed 200𝜁 1/4 1 + 40𝜁 1/8 1 )

𝜁 3; 𝜁 repaired 

> 4

𝜁 3 Final assembly (self‑consistency) 

6𝜁 1 + 6𝜁 2 𝜁 repaired  

> 4

; final self‑consistency 

𝜁 repaired  

> 4

Final assembly (point consistency) 

2𝜎 + 2√ 𝜁 1 + 10𝜁 1/8 1 + 𝜁 3/2 

(printed 2𝜎 + 2√𝜁 1 + 𝜁 3/2 )Final error in Equation (S1) 

𝜈 4 Pasting (commuting past ˆ𝐺 ’s) 

426 𝑘 2𝑚 (𝛾 1/16 + 𝜁 1/16 + (𝑑/𝑞) 1/16 ) 𝜈 5 via 𝜈 1 + 2√𝜈 4; 𝜈 8

𝜈 5 Pasting ( ˆ𝐻 –𝐵 

consistency) 

43 𝑘𝑚 𝐸 𝜈 6 via 𝑘 2/𝑞 + 𝑘𝜈 5; 𝜈 7

𝜈 6 Pasting ( 𝐻 –𝐵 

consistency) 

44 𝑘 2𝑚 𝐸 𝐻 –𝐴 consistency: 𝜈 6 + √8𝑚𝜀 + 4𝛿 ≤ 𝜈 𝜈 7 Pasting (over all outcomes) 

46 𝑘 2𝑚 𝐸 Completeness of 𝐻 : 𝜈 7 + 𝜈 8 ≤ 𝜈 𝜈 8 Pasting (from ˆ𝐻 to 𝐺 ) 46 𝑘 2𝑚 (𝛾 1/32 + 𝜁 1/32 + (𝑑/𝑞) 1/32 )

(printed 46 𝑘𝑚 (⋯) )Completeness of 𝐻 : 𝜈 7 + 𝜈 8 ≤ 𝜈 𝜈 Pasting theorem 100 𝑘 2𝑚 𝐸 𝜎 = 𝜅 (1 + 1100𝑚 ) + 2𝜈 + 𝑒 −𝑘/(80000𝑚 2);the induction; Equation (S1) 

17 A.3 Scope 

The quantum soundness theorem is proved from the standard axioms of classical mathematics in Lean (propext , Classical.choice , Quot.sound ). The quantum soundness proof does not invoke the two classical precursor theorems, Raz–Safra [34] and Polishchuk–Spielman [35]. 

## A.4 Checking the completed proof 

At snapshot b39705 (24 June 2026), the library contains no unfinished proofs. The in‑kernel axiom audit checks the dependencies of Test.mainFormal and other selected declarations. Its assert_standard_ax-ioms command requires exactly propext , Classical.choice , and Quot.sound ; Test.mainFormal receives this check. Its separate assert_no_sorry_axiom command rejects a dependency on sorryAx , Lean’s axiom for an unfinished proof. Both commands use Lean.collectAxioms to list the axioms on which a declaration depends and report an error if the condition fails. The declaration audit additionally rejects explicit axiom 

and constant commands in the library tree. As a cosmetic convenience for repository status display, a text scanner checks tracked files for sorry tokens, finding zero at this snapshot; formal soundness relies strictly on the in‑kernel axiom collection above. We later exported the main formal statement to give readers a separate file to inspect against the theorem in the paper. The companion LDT-comparator repository uses the official Lean comparator to check that the library proves this certified target. The exported file imports only Mathlib and includes the declarations needed to state Test.mainFormal . The target theorem has one intentional sorry ; the comparator checks the submitted proof against that target and its dependent definitions. We must also compare this target with the theorem in the paper. The export tooling entered MIPStarRE in commit 9e882d on 16 July 2026. A check for changes to the exported statement followed in commit 5e8e64 on 17 July. Both additions postdate the completion of the proof (24 June 2026). 

## A.5 Software configuration 

At proof completion, Lean and Mathlib are pinned to v4.31.0. The July comparator checkout pins both to 

v4.32.0 . In the June repository state, the build workflow compiles the library and runs the kernel axiom audit on pull requests that change Lean files, Lake configuration, the toolchain, or that workflow. Separate workflows run the blueprint and source‑integrity checks described in Supplementary Appendix D. 

## A.6 Reproducing the checks 

To reproduce the proof checks, select the repository head at 24 June 2026 with its toolchain, build the li‑ brary, and run the declaration and in‑kernel axiom audits described above. The latter verifies the axiom dependencies of the main theorem. The exported‑statement check uses the July revision, regenerates the target statement, and compares it byte by byte with the certified target. The full comparator checks the proof against this target using the library dependency and toolchain from the same revision. 18 B Trajectory of the formal statements 

## Structure, notation, and color conventions 

We trace how the statements changed during the formalization of the quantum low individual‑degree test (LIDT) [22], using the 2,778‑commit pinned history of the MIPStarRE repository. Each milestone cites a pull request, commit, or issue. We follow the statements across the ten blueprint chapters and list the formal gap notes. • Theorem and lemma numbering: When an environment heading names a statement in the paper, its base number matches the paper’s numbering [22]. Other labels are local to this appendix. • Defect highlighting: Light rose highlighting marks placeholder witnesses unrelated to the input, un‑ proved hypotheses, missing side conditions, or invalid algebraic steps. • Repair highlighting: Light teal highlighting marks proved constructions, corrected domain bounds, and completed proofs. • Commit and pull request identifiers: Pull requests (PR #123), issues (issue #456), and commits ( 8ae0cc )cite historical commits and issues in the public repository. Throughout this appendix, measurement , sub‑measurement , and projective sub‑measurement refer to the finite‑ matrix structures used for the LIDT paper. A sub‑measurement has positive outcomes whose total is at most the identity; a measurement has total equal to the identity; and a projective sub‑measurement also has idempotent outcomes. We therefore distinguish a family of projective matrices from a projective sub‑ measurement, and both from a complete projective measurement. In all formal declarations, operator mea‑ surements act on finite‑dimensional spaces and are represented by finite complex matrices Matrix (𝜄, 𝜄; ℂ) on finite decidable carrier types 𝜄 .

## B.1 Three worked trajectories 

A formally valid shortcut is a compiler‑accepted construction that avoids part of the intended proof or changes the statement without proving the paper’s claim: Lean verifies that a proof term establishes its stated proposition, but whether that proposition expresses the original mathematical claim requires a separate check [31]. We follow three statements from their initial compiler‑accepted shortcuts to the corrected theorems, showing where later proof steps required a repair. 

B.1.1 Trajectory 1: rounding to projectors 

Lemma 5.6 in the paper takes an almost‑projective measurement {𝐴 𝑎 } on a state 𝜓 with rounding defect at most 2𝜁 and produces a family of projective matrices {𝑅 𝑎 } close to 𝐴 𝑎 on 𝜓 , satisfying 𝐴 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐼 ≈ 2√𝜁 𝑅 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐼 and 

∑𝑎 𝑅 𝑎 ≤ (1 + 2√𝜁)𝐼 . The initial formalization at commit 8ae0cc used a witness unrelated to both 𝐴 and 𝜓 ,defining a trivial 1 × 1 projection matrix [1] on an unrelated one‑dimensional carrier ( carrier := PUnit ). This satisfied the existential goal at distance zero from itself while establishing no closeness to the input measurement 𝐴 . Chapter 7 could not use this result because it required state‑dependent closeness on the input carrier ℋ𝐴 (PR #287). The final verified theorem (PR #1126, PR #1632) constructs the projective ma‑ trices on ℋ𝐴 by continuous functional calculus in three cases, using an exact eigenspace projection at 

𝜁 = 0 , a spectral cutoff for 0 < 𝜁 ≤ 1/4 , and zero projectors for 𝜁 > 1/4 , achieving the sharp 2√𝜁 close‑ ness bound ( projectiveNonMeasurement_of_sourceAlmostProjective_two_mul_full ). Contrasting the 19 defective stand‑in with the verified theorem gives: 

∑

> 𝑎

⟨𝜓|(𝐴 𝑎 − 𝐴 2𝑎 ) ⊗ 𝐼|𝜓⟩ ≤ 2𝜁 ⟹∃{𝑅 𝑎 } ⊆ End (ℂ 1), 𝑅 2𝑎 = 𝑅 𝑎 = 𝑅 †𝑎 , ∑

> 𝑎

𝑅 𝑎 ≤ (1 + 2 √𝜁)𝐼 (defective witness on PUnit )

∃{𝑅 𝑎 } ⊆ End (ℋ 𝐴 ), 𝑅 2𝑎 = 𝑅 𝑎 = 𝑅 †𝑎 ,𝐴 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐼 ≈ 2√𝜁 𝑅 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐼, ∑

> 𝑎

𝑅 𝑎 ≤ (1 + 2 √𝜁)𝐼 (repaired theorem on ℋ𝐴 ).

(S2) Here 𝐴 is a measurement and 𝜓 is normalized. The earlier witness on PUnit was on an unrelated carrier and did not satisfy the required closeness relation to the input strategy. 

B.1.2 Trajectory 2: Naimark sub‑measurement dilation 

Theorem 5.1 in the paper takes sub‑measurements {𝐴 𝑥 𝑎 } and {𝐵 𝑦 𝑏 } on a bipartite state 𝜓 and calls the dilated outputs measurements on the original outcome alphabets, preserving correlations. The first formal draft (82d70f ) asserted completeness on the unextended alphabet. For a deficient input, completeness on that alphabet cannot preserve all outcome probabilities. For example, on a one‑dimensional space with a single outcome, 

𝐴 ∗ = 0, 𝐵 ∗ = 𝐼 ⟹ ⟨𝜓|𝐴 ∗ ⊗ 𝐵 ∗|𝜓⟩ = 0, ˆ𝐴 ∗ = ˆ 𝐵 ∗ = 𝐼 ⟹ 1. (S3) The corrected construction first completes each sub‑measurement on an extended alphabet: 

𝐴 𝑥,+ 𝑎 = 𝐴 𝑥 𝑎 , 𝐴 𝑥,+ ⊥ = 𝐼 − ∑ 

> 𝑎

𝐴 𝑥 𝑎 . (S4) After projective dilation, we retain the original outcomes as a projective sub‑measurement. The bipartite construction (PR #1782, 440cb0 ) proves 

⟨𝜓|𝐴 𝑥 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐵 𝑦 𝑏 |𝜓⟩ = ⟨ ˆ 𝜓| ˆ 𝐴 𝑥 𝑎 ⊗ ˆ 𝐵 𝑦 𝑏 | ˆ 𝜓⟩ , ∑

> 𝑎

ˆ𝐴 𝑥 𝑎 ≤ 𝐼, ∑

> 𝑏

ˆ𝐵 𝑦 𝑏 ≤ 𝐼. (S5) Here ˆ𝜓 is the original state tensored with a product auxiliary state, with registers reordered by prover. The construction for each question at 6311ba preserved marginals but still required the joint correlation the‑ orem. The repaired construction in PR #1782 ( 440cb0 ) supplies that identity on the four‑register space 

(ℋ 𝐴 ⊗ ℋ aux ,𝐴 ) ⊗ (ℋ 𝐵 ⊗ ℋ aux ,𝐵 ).

B.1.3 Trajectory 3: the soundness statement 

Theorem 3.10 in the paper states soundness under 𝑘 ≥ 𝑚𝑑 . The history includes a theorem restricted to a shared carrier and a theorem with independent carriers whose statement was revised during integration. The early declaration at f659da used one shared carrier and took a bridge package containing the conclusion as an input. By PR #912 ( 805e89 ), the same‑space mainFormal already required 400𝑚𝑑 ≤ 𝑘 and 0 < 𝑘 . At 

440cb0 , the two declarations had different assumptions: 

mainFormal ∶ one shared carrier , 400𝑚𝑑 ≤ 𝑘, 0 < 𝑘, 

mainFormal_sourceStatement ∶ independent carriers , 𝑚𝑑 ≤ 𝑘 with no 0 < 𝑘. (S6) The statement with independent carriers needed two corrections: pasting needs 𝑘 ≥ 400𝑚𝑑 (issue #1507), while 𝑑 = 𝑘 = 0 makes the printed error vanish (issue #422). Commits 78d56a and 27df27 added the stronger sampling bound and positivity condition to this theorem. Commit 28d541 removed the same‑space theo‑ rem and named the independently quantified theorem Test.mainFormal . Its final statement appears in Section A.1; the zero‑sampling counterexample and pasting estimate appear in Sections C.7.2 and C.8.1. 20 B.2 Timeline of formal transitions 

Table S2 summarizes the mathematical statement transitions and repairs from March to June 2026; Figure 2 places the project’s phases and review changes on the same calendar. 

Table S2 | Chronology of formal transitions and repairs (March–June 2026). In March and April most entries replace an intermediate stand‑in with a proved construction. The May and June entries document proofs of the bridge hypotheses, corrected side conditions, and checks required before merging. 

24 Mar PR #19, PR #36 Ch. 5 (Expansion) Tautological 

rfl 

Defined Fourier inner product directly as Kronecker delta; proved by reflexivity. 

27 Mar commit 78a14c Ch. 5 (Expansion) Definitional alias Defined Laplacian difference form as 𝐿 diff ≔ 𝐿 ; proved by rfl .

03 Apr commit 826b53 Ch. 2 (Registers) Tensor registers Added explicit left/right tensor placement, while some of Bob’s operators were still placed with liftLeft .

04 Apr PR #148 Ch. 2 (Registers) Register placement Corrected liftLeft → liftRight mislabeling for Bob (𝐴 ⊗ 𝐵 ). 

05 Apr PR #210 Ch. 9 (Pasting) Empty support Case‑split collision bound ( 𝑘 ≤ 𝑞 ) and empty support (𝑘 > 𝑞 ) in ldDnoteq .

09 Apr PR #251 Ch. 7 (SDP) Formulation fix Refactored SDP primal from complete measurement to sub‑measurement ( ∑ 𝑇 𝑔 ≤ 𝐼 ). 

09 Apr commit bfd9ed Ch. 7 (SDP) Trivial delta Solved the reduced SDP using single‑outcome delta 

𝑇 𝑔 = 𝛿 𝑔,𝑔 0 𝐼 and dual 𝑍 = 𝐼 .

09 Apr commit 8ae0cc Ch. 4 (Rounding) Unrelated 1D witness Proved rounding using trivial witness 𝑅 = [1] on an unrelated 1D space ℂ1 (carrier := PUnit ). 

09 Apr commit 48d147 Ch. 7 (Self‑Imp.) Supplied hypotheses Supplied four bridge fields: state permutation invariance, helper self‑consistency, evaluation data processing, and final fields. 

09 Apr PR #287 Ch. 4 (Rounding) Input‑ dependent statement Required the rounding statement to depend on input measurement 𝐴 and state 𝜓 .

11 Apr PR #303 Ch. 4 (SVD) Assumption bundling Stored the 𝑄 ≈ 𝑃 approximation bound as an unproved field in QXPLayerData .

12 Apr commit f659da Ch. 10 (Assembly) Assumed conclusion Required the target conclusion as input field witness 

in MainFormalBridgePackage .

15 Apr PR #375, PR #385 Ch. 2 (Test) Branch correction Removed false point‑agreement and per‑prover goodness claims (issue #360); restored cross‑prover agreement branch and proved symmetrized strategy’s self‑consistency equal to it. 

15 Apr PR #407 Ch. 1 (Precursors) Conditional statement Merged a classical soundness statement containing 

sorry ; issue #408 flagged the defect and c530eb 

reverted it the same day. 

16 Apr PR #416 Ch. 1 (Precursors) Conditional statement Replaced sorryAx classical statements with conditional versions and added the axiom audit. 

18 Apr PR #473, PR #526 Ch. 4 (Rounding) Caller‑supplied data Converted RankReductionBridgePackage into caller‑supplied parameters. 

Date Milestone Module Phenomenon Change 

Continued on next page 

21 19 Apr commit de9a97 Ch. 6 (Variance) Fourier coefficient Replaced default with a witness storing the constant Fourier coefficient; orthogonal slots remained zero. 

20 Apr PR #542 Ch. 6 (Variance) Trace assembly Used the decomposition to prove the global‑variance trace identity. 

21 Apr PR #495, PR #561 Ch. 9 (Pasting) Sentinel removal Deleted extractSliceOr0 ; introduced 

InterpolationSupportWitness .

22 Apr PR #576 Ch. 5 (Expansion) Character sums Proved Fourier orthonormality from additive character sums via Mathlib. 

22 Apr PR #552 Ch. 10 (Induction) Coefficient repair Proved pasting error factorization 𝜈 paste ≤ 15 𝜈 ind ,resolving 𝑚 = 1 arithmetic gap. 

25 Apr commit f553d9 ,commit 1d3532 

Ch. 4 (SVD) SVD field removal Removed explicit SVD fields from QXPLayerData and proved 𝑃 ≈ 𝑄 from primitive fields. 

25 Apr PR #726 Ch. 4 (Rounding) Projector range ONB Constructed the auxiliary space from projector ranges 

IsProj.rangeONB .

27 Apr commit 323776 Ch. 2 (Registers) Direct‑sum helpers Added BiProjStrat direct‑sum symmetrization helpers on the role‑tagged carrier. 

27 Apr commit 15df91 Ch. 9 (Pasting) Quadratic error Corrected lem:from-H-to-G telescoping sum error from linear 46𝑘𝑚 to quadratic 46𝑘 2𝑚 .

29 Apr issue #904, PR #909 Ch. 10 (Induction) Cascade absorption Absorbed +2𝜁 1 completion term into cascade parameter 𝜁 2 (coeff 42 ). 

01 May PR #958, commit c31419 

Ch. 2 (Registers) Independent carriers Generalized ProjStrat to separate Alice and Bob carrier types. 

01 May commit a3fcfc Ch. 5 (Expansion) Combinatorial sum Proved Laplacian edge identity from entrywise indicator symmetries and bijections. 

01 May commit 9343ff ,issue #933 Ch. 3 (Prelim) State normalization Added explicit QuantumState.IsNormalized 

hypothesis required by the paper’s expectation bounds. 

03 May PR #1126 Ch. 4 (Rounding) Zero‑error case Formulated 3‑branch spectral cutoff with exact 

1‑eigenspace projection at 𝜁 = 0 .

04 May PR #1190, issue #1099 Ch. 4 (Line‑169) Pre‑completion Proved pre‑completion transport 𝜁 1 + 10𝜁 1/8 1 via match‑mass monotonicity. 

04 May PR #1210, commit da3e3f 

Ch. 4 (SVD) Rectangular identities Proved rectangular‑SVD identities under supplied factors and their algebraic hypotheses. 

05 May commit 773228 Ch. 4 (SVD) Positive‑Gram extension Constructed coisometric factor from positive Gram matrix under required cardinality bound. 

05 May issue #1093, PR #1239, commit dc2fae 

Ch. 7 (SDP) Total overlap Proved total‑overlap displacement 𝜂 ≤ √|𝔽 𝑞 |𝜀 DP after setup in PR #1222. 

06 May commit 3685be Ch. 7 (SDP) False dominance hypothesis Introduced block SDP, but assumed saturation via the unproved hypothesis 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 .

11 May PR #1462 Ch. 7 (Self‑Imp.) Conditional theorem Isolated selfImprovement_assumingFinalFields ;restored the theorem statement. 

Date Milestone Module Phenomenon Change 

Continued on next page 

22 11 May issue #1456, PR #1466, PR #1496 Ch. 6 (Variance) Statement restoration Removed three supplied variance‑bound hypotheses from globalVarianceOfPoints ; restored paper statement and proved it via local transport. 

13 May PR #1539 Ch. 10 (Induction) Conditional API removal Removed mainInductionPublicWrapper and conditional induction APIs. 

15 May PR #1632 Ch. 4 (Ortho) Sharp constant Proved sharp paper constant 100𝜁 1/4 (via 2𝜁 scale), avoiding the doubled 4𝜁 error. 

16 May PR #1638 Ch. 7 (Self‑Imp.) Theorem assembly Assembled self‑improvement from strategy and consistency inputs using the tracked SDP theorem. 

17 May PR #1643 Ch. 9 (Pasting) Degree‑zero branch Implemented dedicated 𝑑 = 0 constant‑polynomial pasting construction. 

18 May PR #1664, issue #1645 Ch. 10 (Induction) Corrected input Restated selfImprovementInInductionSection to take a polynomial measurement 𝐺 and proved it from Chapter 7 theorem. 

19 May PR #1708 Ch. 7 (SDP) Duality proof Proved cone separation and slack mass saturation lemma without 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 .

22 May commit 440cb0 ,PR #1782 Ch. 3 (Naimark) Tensor assembly Proved 4‑register two‑sided correlation preservation 

naimarkTensorProductCorrelation .

23 May commit 78d56a Ch. 10 (Induction) Factor‑400 range Confirmed 400𝑚𝑑 ≤ 𝑘 for the revised induction statement; the restricted same‑space theorem already required it (PR #912). 

23 May commit 27df27 Ch. 10 (Soundness) Positive sample count Added 0 < 𝑘 to the reopened two‑space statement to exclude the zero error at 𝑑 = 𝑘 = 0 .

10 Jun commit 28d541 Ch. 2 (Registers) Same‑space removal Removed legacy same‑space strategy definitions, renamed two‑space theorem to Test.mainFormal .

19 Jun PR #2348 Ch. 3 (Prelim) Heterogeneous lemma Proved heterogeneous consistency lemma 

consSubMeas_heterogeneous on distinct carriers. 

20 Jun commit 3e09f4 Ch. 7 (SDP) Dominance removal Removed all *WithDominance declarations; used canonical slack saturation throughout. 

Date Milestone Module Phenomenon Change 

## B.3 Ten‑chapter formalization milestones 

The formalization spans ten blueprint chapters. Combining their results exposed mismatched registers, unproved dominance hypotheses, invalid default values, and missing side conditions in the induction. Table S3 documents the ten chapter milestones. For each chapter, the table gives the initial statement, the defect identified during integration (surfaced by downstream compilation failures, automated CI scanners, or maintainer code review), the corrected statement, the repository commit or PR, and the mathematical discussion in Supplementary Appendices A to C. 23 Table S3 | Ten‑chapter formalization milestones. Initial statements, problems found during integration, corrected forms, and mathematical case studies in Supplementary Appendices A to C. 

Ch. 1: Classical soundness 

(15 Apr–23 May) Quoted classical soundness directly as a Lean theorem using placeholder sorry 

(187c2c ). issue #408 identified 

sorryAx among the theorem’s transitive axioms; PR reverted same day ( c530eb ). Stated as conditional premise 

PolishchukSpielman ClassicalSoundness Statement ; quantum soundness verified axiom‑clean. PR #416, issue #408 App. A §A.3 

Ch. 2: Quantum registers 

(3 Apr–1 May) Single local carrier 𝜄 

with both operators multiplied on the left register (𝐴 ⋅ 𝐵) ⊗ 𝐼 

(a0bec1 ). Audit revealed both provers acting on the left register; Bob operator lifts set to 

liftLeft (PR #148). Independent carriers 𝜄 𝐴 , 𝜄 𝐵 

with explicit 𝐴 ⊗ 𝐼 vs 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐵 ;direct‑sum role carrier Role ×(𝜄 𝐴 ⊕ 𝜄 𝐵 ).PR #148, PR #958, issue #560 App. C Case I (§C.2) 

Ch. 3: Naimark dilation 

(30 Mar–22 May) Complete output asserted for sub‑measurement input on original alphabet 𝒜 (82d70f ); 1‑measurement local dilation. issue #933 (unnormalized state scaling); 6311ba 

(questionwise interface lacked joint correlation preservation). Projective sub‑measurements on 𝒜 

via Option (𝒜) completion; 4‑register bipartite dilation space. PR #332, PR #1782, issue #933 App. B §B.1.2 

Ch. 4: Spectral rounding 

(9 Apr–3 May) Rounding proved on an unrelated 1D space 

carrier := PUnit 

(8ae0cc ); 𝑃 ≈ 𝑄 bound bundled in 

QXPLayerData .PR #287 required rounding to depend on input 𝐴 ; missing rectangular SVD in Mathlib; Line‑169 transport incurred √⋅ 

loss (issue #1099). Rounding by continuous functional calculus in 3 cases (PR #1126); positive‑Gram polar extension ( 773228 ); match‑mass Line‑169 transport. PR #287, PR #1126, PR #1190 App. B §B.1.1; C Case IV.a (§C.5.1) 

Ch. 5: Hypercube graph 

(24 Mar–22 Apr) Fourier inner product defined as Kronecker delta via rfl ; Laplacian difference form defined as 𝐿 diff ≔ 𝐿 

(78a14c ). PR #721 review found that the definition did not express the random‑edge Dirichlet form. Fourier orthonormality proved from character sums (PR #576); combinatorial Laplacian proved entrywise from edge symmetries. PR #576, PR #721, 

a3fcfc 

App. C Case V (§C.6) 

Ch. 6: Global variance 

(24 Mar–22 Apr) Variance decomposition used 

default zero‑operator witness; globalVarian ceOfPoints took 3 supplied hypotheses (issue #1456). Fields for orthogonal Fourier data set to zero; issue #1456 found that hypotheses assumed the required conclusions. Centered residual family 

𝐴 𝑢 ⟂ = 𝐴 𝑢 − 𝐴 avg satisfying 

∑𝑢 𝐴 𝑢 ⟂ = 0 ; lifted trace identity with prefactor 

1/𝑀 .PR #542, PR #1466, PR #1496 App. C Case V (§C.6) 

Ch. 7: Self‑imp. & SDP 

(9 Apr–19 May) 

SelfImprovement BridgePackage 

assumed the conclusions as fields; SDP solved with 1‑outcome delta witness; saturation assumed 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 .issue #1453 found that the proof returned a supplied conclusion; 

𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 proved false in general; substitution of a sub‑measurement required control of total overlap 𝜂 .Finite‑dimensional canonical strong duality; slack saturation from weak‑duality inequalities; total‑overlap bound 

𝜂 ≤̂ 𝜁 + 2√̂𝜁 ortho from completeness transfer. PR #1239, PR #1462, PR #1708 App. C Cases II, III, IV.b (§C.3– C.5.2) 

Chapter & topic Initial statement Problem found Final statement PR / issue Math ref 

Continued on next page 

24 Ch. 8: Com‑ mutativity 

(3 Apr–1 May) Theorem header typed at 𝑚 while point consistency evaluated on 𝔽 𝑚+1 𝑞 slices; scalar‑to‑tensor transport assumed no loss. issue #930 identified dimension mismatch on transverse slices; issue #713 exposed 

2√𝜁 tensor transport loss. Strategy stated at successor dimension 𝑚 + 1 

via params.next ; full‑slice scalar‑to‑tensor bridges proved with √𝜁 loss. PR #730, issue #930, 

> 6824be

Gap notes (§B.5) 

Ch. 9: Pasting 

(5 Apr–29 Apr) The function 

> extractSliceOr0

returned 0 on empty slices; linear error 

46𝑘𝑚 in telescoping sum; missing 𝑑 = 0 

constant branch. The default zero value invalidated point consistency on unmeasured slices; summing the recurrence with 

√𝜈 4 ∝ 𝑘 gave quadratic 𝑘 2 loss. Support‑certified interpolation via 

> Interpolation SupportWitness

;quadratic error 46𝑘 2𝑚 ;dedicated 𝑑 = 0 pasting construction. PR #210, PR #495, PR #1643 App. C Cases VI, VII (§C.7, §C.8.1) 

Ch. 10: Soundness induction 

(12 Apr–23 May) Printed condition 

𝑘 ≥ 𝑚𝑑 admitted 

𝑚𝑑 ≤ 𝑘 < 400𝑚𝑑 and 

𝑘 = 0 ; successor error estimate 

(1.01)(4) = 4.04 > 4 

failed at 𝑚 = 1 .issue #1507 exposed factor‑400 pasting gap; issue #422 found that the error vanishes at 

𝑘 = 0 ; issue #1645 identified a mismatched input. Tightened side conditions 

400𝑚𝑑 ≤ 𝑘 and 0 < 𝑘 ;successor error bound 

𝜈 paste ≤ 15 𝜈 ind repairing 

𝑚 = 1 to 2.42 ≤ 4 .PR #552, PR #909, PR #1664 App. C §C.8.2, §C.8.1, §C.7.2 

Chapter & topic Initial statement Problem found Final statement PR / issue Math ref 

## B.4 The blueprint as a measure of progress 

The blueprint, built with Massot’s leanblueprint tool [19], tracks the dependencies between statements. Each target statement is marked not ready while its formulation or dependencies remain unsettled, stated 

once a Lean counterpart exists, and fully formalized once both statement and proof are verified (the leanok 

marker). Panels b and c of Figure 2 plot these counts by day, alongside the sorry placeholder count in the Lean sources. The counts are taken per first‑parent commit, over the first 1,669 of the 1,793 first‑parent commits reachable at the pinned snapshot, which form the integration sequence within that snapshot’s 2,778 total commits. The two panels measure distinct properties: a chapter whose Lean files contain no sorry markers can still as‑ sert statements that fail to match the paper. Counts in this subsection track unique Lean declarations linked via the blueprint’s \lean tags (several per statement environment; remarks excluded); the main text’s 181 blueprint nodes are the statement environments themselves at the pinned snapshot, which link to 598 dec‑ larations. On 29 April 2026, the placeholder count dropped to one (the main theorem itself) and remained there for 335 commits; that day the blueprint listed 283 target declarations, of which 114 were not ready. While this one placeholder remained, the blueprint continued to expand: by 8 May it listed 610 targets, with 246 not ready. Blueprint counts were also non‑monotone: on 20 May the not‑ready count rose from 5 to 26, and on 22–23 May the target count dropped from 668 to 612 as green (fully formalized) construction nodes were reclassified against the paper. When the last placeholder was replaced by a proof on 23 May (27df27 ), 23 nodes were still marked not ready; the not‑ready count reached zero later that day, settling at 566 fully formalized target declarations through 4 June 2026. Individual chapters also required revisions after being marked complete; their completion dates, integra‑ tion challenges, and final verified statements are documented in the consolidated milestone ledger (Ta‑ ble S3). 25 B.5 The 25 gap notes 

At snapshot b39705 (24 June 2026), the repository contains 25 gap notes. These notes document audits that found no discrepancy, repairs to formal proofs, and corrections to statements from the paper. None of these notes is an unfinished dependency of mainFormal at the pinned snapshot. The 25 gap notes fall into eight categories by the nature of the suspected discrepancy; two issues span several notes (issue #930 five, issue #1099 two), so notes are cited by identifier and, where needed, a short slug: (i) Corrected side conditions (2 notes): Tightened or added hypotheses of the paper’s main theorem (issues 906 and 422). (ii) Repaired formal‑interface mismatches (3 notes): Mismatches between the paper’s hypotheses and early formal statements or proofs, repaired on the formal side; the paper’s statements are unchanged (issues 196, 1230, and 930/self‑improvement 𝜈 ). (iii) Clarified wording and statement scope (5 notes): Impossibility of complete original‑alphabet di‑ lation for sub‑measurements, a harmless ambient‑dimension typo, normalization conventions, re‑ moval of a nonnegativity assumption, and mismatched blueprint links (issues naimark, 930/dimen‑ sion typo, 933, 938, 2338). (iv) Corrected quantitative error bounds (5 notes): Substitution losses, telescoping factors, and the total‑overlap displacement (issues 1099/line‑169 loss, 1099/sharper fix, 1093, 930/successor coefficient, 930/pasting error). (v) Endpoint branches (3 notes): Case splits for empty distinct tuples ( 𝑘 > 𝑞 ), exact zero‑error spectral cutoffs ( 𝜁 = 0 ), and degree‑zero pasting ( 𝑑 = 0 ) (issues 930/distinct tuples, 1100, 1622). (vi) Adjusted constants (1 note): An increased scalar coefficient (issue 904). (vii) Design adjustments (1 note): The blueprint polynomial definition recast to the paper’s representative predicate (polynomial‑divergence). (viii) Verified design decisions (5 notes): Audits of choices made in the formalization that found no dis‑ crepancy with the paper, and a proof recovering the paper’s sharp constant (issues 458, 713, 760, 1228, 1032). Table S4 lists all 25 gap notes, one row per file, by identifier, chapter, theorem stage, category, severity, scope, resolution, and case‑study cross‑reference (— where no case study discusses the note). Severity is an author judgement of the discrepancy’s consequence for the paper statement, independent of the difficulty rating inside each note. Scope records whether the discrepancy concerned the paper’s printed statement, the formal statement only, or a proof step. Figure S2 shows when each of the 25 gap notes was opened and closed. These files document 20 distinct suspected issues. Notes were opened when a discrepancy was suspected and closed when the decision they called for was executed in the repository: the paper corrected, the formalization repaired, or the discrep‑ ancy dismissed with a recorded reason. The commit that executed the decision dates the closure. The table uses each note’s concluding description and the figure the action documented in its commit history. These classifications differ for five notes because the text and commit history describe different aspects of the outcome. For mathematical derivations of the quantitative gaps, including the Line‑169 transport loss (𝜁 1 + 10𝜁 1/8 1 ), the total‑overlap displacement ( 𝜂 ≤̂ 𝜁 + 2√̂𝜁 ortho ), and the Bernoulli telescoping error ( 46𝑘 2𝑚 ), we refer to the dedicated case studies in Supplementary Appendix C. 26 (a) (b)        

> #930: one suspected issue splits into five gap notes (1 May) First notes open 29 Apr (#904, #906) #2338 opens 12 Jun 13 3230 Apr–5 May: ten notes close the day they open (eight audits: no discrepancy; two repairs already in place) 16–27 May: nine repairs and three statement corrections; on 23 May #906 and #422 correct the printed statement #2338 No change #196, #1230 Repairs
> 7 Mar 2026 1 Apr 1 May 1 Jun 24 Jun
> Unfinished proofs ( sorry )in the Lean library 149 (1 Apr) 1 (29 Apr) 0 from 23 May

Figure S2 | Life cycle of proof‑gap notes. (a) The number of gap notes open on each date, drawn as a band whose width counts the open items (one strand each); decreases in width mark notes closing, with their outcomes labelled directly. Twenty‑five gap notes opened between 29 April and 12 June 2026, and all were closed by 23 June: nine after an audit found no discrepancy, thirteen by repairs to the formalization, and three by corrections to formal theorem statements (issue #906, issue #422, and the Naimark note). A note counts as closed when the decision it called for was executed in the repository. Ten of the notes closed the day they opened. The retrospective audit issue #930 entered as one suspected issue and split into five notes. 

(b) On the same time axis: the number of unfinished proofs in the library (daily closing values), which had fallen to one by 29 April, when the first notes opened, and reached zero on 23 May, the day five notes closed. Dates and outcomes are taken from the gap‑note files and their commit history; the comments in this figure’s file list the dates and outcomes for each entry. 

The total‑overlap note and the completed proof The total‑overlap gap note was filed on 5 May 2026 (e42bf2 ), and the proof completed the required transport on 16 May ( 134d08 ). We show the repair and how it satisfies the final error bound in Section C.5.2. 

Table S4 | The 25 gap notes. Gap notes indexed by identifier, chapter, stage, category, severity, scope, math‑ ematical resolution, and case‑study reference (— where no case study discusses the note). Rows are the gap notes at the pinned snapshot, one per note, ordered by the date each note opened; determinations follow the decision executed in the repository. 

issue‑904 Ch. 10 Cascade Constant Low Proof Repaired: widened Step 6 cascade coefficient from 40 to 42, absorbing the completion proposition’s omitted +2𝜁 1

residual. Case IV.a 

issue‑906 Ch. 10 Main soundness Side condition High Statement Corrected: printed 𝑘 ≥ 𝑚𝑑 

strengthened to 𝑘 ≥ 400𝑚𝑑 , the sampling hypothesis required by the successor pasting theorem; the excluded interval shown to be nonempty. Case VII 

Note ID Ch. Stage Category Severity Scope Determination & resolution Case ref 

Continued on next page 

27 issue‑196 Ch. 7 SDP primal Interface Medium Formal statement Repaired: primal feasible set restored to submeasurements 

∑𝑔 𝑇 𝑔 ⪯ 𝐼 ; the equality encoding excluded the paper’s strict Slater witness. Case III 

issue‑458 Ch. 3 Foundation layer Audit Low Statement Audited: prime‑power encoding of 𝑞 , finite‑support distributions, and the zero measurement family; no hypothesis or conclusion altered; no discrepancy. —

issue‑713 Ch. 8 Scalar transport Audit Low Proof Absorbed: converting the hybrid scalar estimate adds 2√𝜁 in the tensor closenessOfIP form; the existing error bound includes it; no discrepancy. —

issue‑760 Ch. 8 Scalar chain Audit Low Proof Audited: ten‑step scalar approximation chain and the exact BAB–ABA swap identity; the formal total matches the paper’s 

𝜈 = 48𝑚(√𝛾 + √𝜁) ; no discrepancy. —

polynomial‑ divergence 

Ch. 3 Polynomial defn. Design Low Statement Repaired: blueprint polynomial set recast from a function‑type subtype to the paper’s representative‑of‑degree‑ ≤ 𝑑 

predicate, enabling Schwartz–Zippel. —

issue‑930 

(dimension typo) Ch. 8 Commutativ‑ ity Wording Low Statement Clarified: printed (𝑚, 𝑞, 𝑑) is a harmless typo; the formal statement types the ambient strategy at (𝑚 + 1, 𝑞, 𝑑) via 

params.next ; no Lean change needed. —

issue‑930 

(distinct tuples) Ch. 9 Distinct tuples Endpoint Low Statement Repaired: distinct‑tuple weights defined for all 𝑘 , normalized only when 𝑘 ≤ 𝑞 ; the 𝑘 > 𝑞 case proved with the trivial 𝑘 2/𝑞 bound. —

issue‑930 

(successor coeff.) Ch. 10 Successor step Error bound Medium Proof Repaired: printed absorption 

(1 + 1100𝑚 )(𝑚 2 + 3) ≤ (𝑚 + 1) 2 fails at 𝑚 = 1 ; the sharper 𝜈 paste ≤ 𝜈 ind /5 

absorbs both coefficients for all 

𝑚 ≥ 1 .Case VII 

issue‑930 

(pasting error) Ch. 9 Bernoulli pasting Error bound Medium Statement Corrected: telescoping the printed stage losses gives 𝜈 8 = 46𝑘 2𝑚 , not the printed 46𝑘𝑚 ; the corrected quadratic error is absorbed by 

𝜈 = 100𝑘 2𝑚 .Case VII 

Note ID Ch. Stage Category Severity Scope Determination & resolution Case ref 

Continued on next page 

28 issue‑930 

(self‑ improvement 

𝜈 )Ch. 7 Self‑ improvement Interface High Formal statement Repaired: restored the paper’s input consistency hypothesis 

𝐴 u 

> 𝑎

⊗ 𝐼 ≃ 𝜈 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐺 [𝑔( u)=𝑎] to 

selfImprovement ; removed 

SelfImprovementObligations .Case II 

issue‑933 Ch. 3 Preliminar‑ ies Wording Low Proof Audited: paper’s unit‑vector convention versus the positive‑cone QuantumState ;

IsNormalized assumed in each lemma rather than in the state definition; no theorem‑level defect. —

issue‑938 

(truncation) Ch. 4 Truncation Wording Low Proof Audited: abstract averaging lemma proved for arbitrary real 𝑓 ,dropping the paper’s implicit 

𝑓 ≥ 0 ; a conservative strengthening; no discrepancy. —

issue‑1100 Ch. 4 Spectral rounding Endpoint Low Proof Repaired: unconditional rounding witness from the paper’s 

0 < 𝜁 ≤ 1/4 branch, an exact 𝜁 = 0 

spectral‑projector branch, and a trivial 𝜁 > 1/4 branch. —

issue‑1099 

(line‑169 loss) Ch. 4 Line‑169 transport Error bound Medium Proof Repaired: the printed 

prop:triangle-sub use drops 

√𝜁 2; the theorem claiming exactly 

𝜁 1 was removed and the formalization proves the bound 

𝜁 1 + 10𝜁 1/8 1 .Case IV.a 

issue‑1099 

(sharper fix) Ch. 4 Line‑169 repair Error bound Medium Proof Repaired: pre‑completion match‑mass comparison at 

𝜖 = 100𝜁 1/4 1 takes the square root before completion, giving 

𝜁 1 + 10𝜁 1/8 1 and preserving the final error bound. Case IV.a 

issue‑1093 Ch. 7 Point consistency Error bound Medium Proof Repaired: 𝜂 ≤̂ 𝜁 + 2√̂𝜁 ortho by completeness transfer in both directions ( 134d08 ). Case IV.b 

issue‑1228 Ch. 4 Orthonor‑ malization Audit Low Proof Audited: no discrepancy; pinned Mathlib lacks the rectangular polar theorem, so a project‑local positive‑Gram construction supplies the coisometric factor. —

issue‑1230 Ch. 7 SDP slackness Interface High Proof Repaired: canonical block‑SDP strong duality and saturated slackness proved without dominance 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 ; conditional dominance wrappers removed. Case III 

Note ID Ch. Stage Category Severity Scope Determination & resolution Case ref 

Continued on next page 

29 naimark Ch. 3 Naimark dilation Wording High Statement Corrected: read as projective sub‑measurement on the original alphabet; the complete‑measurement form is impossible; bipartite correlation preservation proved. App. B §B.1.2 

issue‑1032 Ch. 4 Orthonor‑ malization Audit Low Proof Audited: sharp 100𝜁 1/4 paper constant proved at the 2𝜁 

completion scale, avoiding the other completion proof’s larger bound 120𝜁 1/4 ; no discrepancy with the paper. —

issue‑1622 Ch. 9 Degree‑zero pasting Endpoint Medium Proof Repaired: dedicated 𝑑 = 0 pasting branch proved; the unrestricted theorem ldPasting assembles it without adding a 0 < 𝑑 hypothesis. Case VI 

issue‑422 Ch. 10 Main soundness Side condition High Statement Corrected: the printed hypothesis permits 𝑘 = 0 at 𝑑 = 0 , where the printed error vanishes and demands impossible exact degree‑zero consistency; the soundness statement now requires 0 < 𝑘 .Case VI 

issue‑2338 Ch. 3 Blueprint links Wording Low Statement Clarified: Chapter 3 blueprint links retargeted to the two‑space heterogeneous lemma forms; no mathematical discrepancy. —

Note ID Ch. Stage Category Severity Scope Determination & resolution Case ref 

30 C Cross‑module composition in the inductive proof 

## C.1 Overview 

To combine the stages of the inductive proof [22], each theorem must supply the carrier Hilbert space, op‑ erator representation, and error bound required by the next theorem. The cases below concern five kinds of mismatch: 1. Carrier and register mismatches: an operator intended for separate spatial tensor factors ℋ𝐴 ⊗ ℋ 𝐵 acts on a single matrix algebra or an uncoupled space. 2. Inlined conclusions: a theorem assumes its target conclusion as an input hypothesis, leaving callers to prove it. 3. Missing invariants: a downstream stage assumes structural properties that fail for general quantum strategies, such as operator dominance 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 or unit trace normalization. 4. Default values on invalid inputs: a partial function returns 0 on invalid inputs, making the consistency claim false. 5. Insufficient error bounds: intermediate estimates introduce additive error terms that exceed the error allowed by the next theorem. 

C.1.1 Interface mismatches between inductive stages 

While Lean checks that a proof establishes its stated type, combining stages fails whenever an upstream lemma produces an object on a different carrier space, with a different operator representation, or under a weaker error bound than downstream steps require. The simplest example is a theorem that takes its own conclusion as an extra hypothesis. In the early decla‑ ration of mainFormal , the caller supplied the desired measurements and their consistency bounds in Main-FormalBridgePackage . The proof then returned that package’s witness (Section C.2). Writing 𝐻 for the original hypotheses and 𝑄 for the desired conclusion, the early declaration proved 𝐻 ⟹ ( 𝑄 ⟹ 𝑄) ; the repair proves 𝐻 ′ ⟹ 𝑄 from the corrected hypotheses 𝐻 ′ (Section B.1.3). The other cases leave different obligations to the caller: relating carrier spaces, proving that interpolation nodes lie in the support, or obtaining a sufficiently small error bound. In each case, we compare what one stage proves with what the next stage requires, then identify the construction or estimate that closes the gap. 

C.1.2 The completed inductive proof 

The completed proof uses thirteen principal declarations in five stages: Semidefinite programming and duality foundation: 

matrixSdpCanonicalStrongDuality , sdp_statement_with_slackness 

⟹ Self‑improvement core and projective rounding: 

selfImprovementHelper , selfImprovement 

⟹ Inductive slice adapters and answer carriers: 

selfImprovementInInductionSection AnswerSelfImprovementData.ofSelfImprovementInInductionSection AnswerSelfImprovementData.ofAnswerCarrier , SelfImprovementData.ofAnswer 

⟹ Low‑degree pasting and Bernoulli recurrence: 

ldPastingInInductionSection , Pasting.ldPasting 

⟹ Induction and role unsymmetrization: 

mainInductionSuccessorNext_ofSmallErrorConstruction mainInduction , mainFormal . (S7) 31 The steps in Equation (S7) supply the following data: 1. The semidefinite programming stage proves canonical strong duality and slack mass saturation for block matrix variables, constructing a positive sub‑measurement 𝑇 and dual operator 𝑍 ⪰ 0 with 𝑍 ⪰ 𝐴 𝑔 and 

𝑃(𝑇) = 𝐷(𝑍) .2. The self‑improvement proof uses 𝑇 and local and global variance bounds on the hypercube, applying continuous functional calculus and positive‑Gram polar extension to produce an orthonormalized pro‑ jective sub‑measurement 𝐻 with improved self‑consistency. 3. The induction lemmas convert answer‑valued slice strategies on 𝔽 𝑚+1 𝑞 into polynomial‑valued strategies, preserving the slice consistency bounds through product equivalences and Fubini reindexing. 4. The pasting stage combines slice measurements into an ambient polynomial measurement through Bernoulli recurrence and Lagrange interpolation on nodes proved to lie in the support. 5. The final induction step combines the induction hypothesis with self‑improvement and pasting, unsym‑ metrizes the role register, and bounds the accumulated error by mainFormalError .32 C.2 Case study I: register placement, role symmetrization, and self‑consistency 

C.2.1 The top‑level conclusion supplied as a hypothesis 

We examine the declaration behind the statement history in Section B.4. The early theorem received its conclusion through MainFormalBridgePackage .

Definition 10.1a (The top‑level conclusion assumed as a hypothesis ( f659da , 12 April 2026)) . An early draft declared the top‑level theorem with its target conclusion bundled as an input hypothesis:                                            

> -- Schematic excerpt from commit f659da
> structure MainFormalBridgePackage (params) (strategy :ProjStrat params iota) (eps k) : Prop where
> witness : exists G_A G_B,
> ConsRel strategy.state ... (mainFormalError params k eps) /\ ...
> theorem mainFormal (params) (strategy :ProjStrat params iota) (eps : Error )(_hpass :strategy.PassesLowIndividualDegreeTest eps) (k : Nat) (_hk : params.m * params.d <= k) (hbridge : MainFormalBridgePackage params strategy eps k) : exists G_A G_B, ... (mainFormalError params k eps) := by exact hbridge.witness

The proof exact hbridge.witness returns the supplied conclusion directly. Because mainFormal is the top‑level soundness theorem of the entire formalization, packaging the conclusion as a structure hypothesis reduced the verification to the trivial tautology 𝑄 ⟹ 𝑄 . This scaffolding was introduced in an early agent draft ( f659da ) to allow dependent module interfaces to type‑check before the inductive proof compiled. In a subsequent audit, maintainers identified the tautology (issue #493), and an agent session under author guidance replaced MainFormalBridgePackage with the genuine inductive assembly proof ( mainFormal_-of_mainInduction , PR #1789), ensuring that the top‑level theorem discharged all obligations using only verified mathematical prerequisites. The test‑passing and sampling hypotheses, _hpass and _hk , were prop‑ erly bound in the final theorem. 

C.2.2 Spatial register placement and tensor lifts 

Alice’s and Bob’s operators act on separate factors of ℋ𝐴 ⊗ ℋ 𝐵 , as 𝐴 ⊗ 𝐼 𝐵 and 𝐼 𝐴 ⊗ 𝐵 , respectively. Early matrix definitions placed both provers’ operators in a single matrix algebra or on the left factor: ev (𝜓, (𝐴 ⋅ 𝐵) ⊗ 𝐼) . (S8) Commit 050358 introduced explicit left and right Kronecker embeddings, and 7e79c1 (PR #148) corrected Bob’s operators to liftRight , giving the required bipartite tensor representation: ev (𝜓, 𝐴 𝑢 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐵 𝑣 𝑏 ) = Re 𝜏(𝜌 𝜓 (𝐴 𝑢 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐵 𝑣 𝑏 )) . (S9) 

C.2.3 The correlation‑preserving dilation input 

We use the joint correlation identity from the Naimark construction in Section B.1.2. Its outputs are projec‑ tive sub‑measurements on the original alphabets, with the dilated state arranged on Alice’s and Bob’s local registers. This supplies the bipartite input for the role construction below. 33 C.2.4 Role symmetrization on direct‑sum carrier spaces 

The induction theorem mainInduction (𝑚) requires a synchronous, permutation‑invariant strategy. For an arbitrary quantum strategy 𝒮 = (𝜓, 𝐴, 𝐵) on separate local spaces ℋ𝐴 ⊗ℋ 𝐵 , the measurement operators lack permutation symmetry. Naimark dilations constructed independently for Alice and Bob need not produce the same local carrier Hilbert space. PR #958 ( c31419 ) generalized ProjStrat to independently quantified carriers 𝜄 𝐴 and 𝜄 𝐵 . Commit e3e437 

added direct‑sum block helpers, and commit 440cb0 completed the role‑register construction for different local carriers. Both local spaces of the symmetrized strategy embed into the enlarged carrier: 

𝒦 role ≔ ℂ Role ×(𝜄 𝐴 ⊕𝜄 𝐵 ), 𝜌 role ∈ End (𝒦 role ⊗ 𝒦 role ). (S10) The bipartite strategy symmetrizes the state across the two provers by forming an equal mixture of the two tensor orientations: 

𝜌 role = 12 (𝜌 𝜓 ⊕ SWAP (𝜌 𝜓 )), (S11) embedded into the endomorphism space End (𝒦 role ⊗ 𝒦 role ). In the formalization, roleRegisterSymmState 

constructs this density matrix by embedding 𝜌 𝜓 and its swapped permutation into the direct‑sum blocks (localPairABBlock ) scaled by the trace normalization factor roleRegisterDensityScale . Operators act block‑diagonally through localDirectSumBlock , giving a permutation‑invariant strategy even when the original local dimensions differ. 

C.2.5 Relating test agreement to self‑consistency 

The induction requires a within‑prover self‑consistency relation: 

𝐴 𝑢 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐼 ≃ 𝛿 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐴 𝑢 𝑎 , (S12) where the same point measurement acts on both registers [22]. The physical test, by contrast, queries provers on the same point 𝑢 and accepts when answers agree ( 𝑎 = 𝑏 ), measuring cross‑prover consistency 

(𝐴 A, 𝐴 B).Commit 028107 (11 April 2026) defined self‑consistency as the average of two within‑prover defects: 

𝔼 𝑢 (1 − ∑ 

> 𝑎

⟨𝜓| 𝐴 A,𝑢 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐴 A,𝑢 𝑎 |𝜓⟩) and 𝔼 𝑢 (1 − ∑ 

> 𝑎

⟨𝜓| 𝐴 B,𝑢 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐴 B,𝑢 𝑎 |𝜓⟩) , (S13) whereas the printed test measures the overlap mass of 𝐴 A,𝑢 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐴 B,𝑢 𝑎 . PR #385 ( 9645d3 ) restored the cross‑ prover agreement subtest and connected the two formulations through symmetrization. Passing the test bounds cross‑prover agreement error by 3𝜀 in point_agreement_le_three_mul , and the role‑symmetrized strategy 𝒮 role satisfies: selfConsistencyError (𝒮 role ) = pointAgreementError (𝒮) , (S14) proved in roleRegisterSymmStrategy_selfConsistency_eq_pointAgreement . Because both provers in the symmetrized strategy share the same measurement operators, within‑prover self‑consistency coincides with cross‑prover agreement. 

C.2.6 Slice strategies and their error bounds 

At commit 1a7f43 (6 May 2026), the restricted‑slice module established that failure probabilities of restricted strategies and answer‑valued strategies coincide. The induction hypothesis mainInduction (𝑚) , however, requires an explicit strategy for each slice 𝑥 ∈ 𝔽 𝑞 .Commit 440cb0 introduced this required structure: 34 -- Schematic excerpt from commit 440cb0                        

> structure AnswerSuccessorRestrictedFailureProfile (strategy :AnswerSymStrat params.next iota) : Type where
> axisParallel : Fq params -> Error
> selfConsistency : Fq params -> Error
> diagonal : Fq params -> Error
> restrictedGood : forall x, (xRestrictedAnswerSymStratOfAnswer params strategy x).IsGood (axisParallel x) (selfConsistency x) (diagonal x)

The downstream theorem answerSuccessorRestrictedSliceConclusions applies the induction hypoth‑ esis to xRestrictedAnswerSymStratOfAnswer . Lemma answerSuccessorDiagonalSliceIndexErrorAv-erage_eq_diagonalIndexError proves the equality of average errors using a product equivalence and uniform‑average identities on 𝔽 𝑚 𝑞 × 𝔽 𝑞 .The final theorem allows independently quantified carriers and uses the corrected sampling hypotheses stated in Section A.1. The zero‑sampling counterexample appears in Section C.7.2; the sampling history appears in Section B.1.3. 

## C.3 Case study II: assembling self‑improvement and reindexing its bounds 

C.3.1 The self‑improvement theorem and assumed intermediate steps 

Theorem 9.4 of Ji et al. [22] takes a polynomial measurement 𝐺 = {𝐺 𝑔 } consistent with the point measure‑ ment 𝐴 at error 𝜈 . It constructs a projective sub‑measurement 𝐻 = {𝐻 𝑔 } with improved self‑consistency and a dual operator 𝑍 ⪰ 𝔼 𝑢 𝐴 𝑢 𝑔(𝑢) . Early formalizations assumed the intermediate steps in a bridge structure. 

Definition 5.1a (Intermediate steps assumed in a bridge structure ( 48d147 , 9 April 2026)) . An early draft of Chapter 7 declared:                                   

> -- Schematic excerpt from commit 48d147
> structure SelfImprovementBridgePackage (params) (strategy) (G) : Prop where
> permInvariant : PermInvState strategy.state helperStrongSelfConsistency :SelfImprovementHelperConclusion ... -> BipartiteSSCRel strategy.state (uniformDistribution Unit ) ... evaluationDataProcessing : SDDRel strategy.state (uniformDistribution Unit ) ... -> SDDRel strategy.state (uniformDistribution (Point params)) ... finalFields : SelfImprovementHelperConclusion ... -> SelfImprovementFinalFields ...
> theorem selfImprovement (hbridge :SelfImprovementBridgePackage params strategy G) : SelfImprovementConclusion ... := by let _:= hcons --Consistency hypothesis discarded!
> exact hbridge.finalFields ...

Two inputs required by the bridge package differed from those available in Chapter 10: 1. Permutation invariance for orthonormalization: Converting helper sub‑measurements ˆ𝐻 into projective sub‑measurements 𝐻 via orthonormalization required PermInvState strategy.state , whereas induc‑ tive slice strategies provide only goodness ( strategy.IsGood eps delta gamma ). 2. Different index spaces (Unit ≇ Point): Semidefinite programming proved relation estimates over the singleton space uniformDistribution Unit , whereas induction required estimates over the uniform distribution on affine points uniformDistribution (Point params) .35 C.3.2 Assembling the internal proof without bridge packages 

The theorem statement was restored in d8f6a6 (PR #1462), conditional wrappers were removed in 4b04a2 

(PR #1539), and the internal proof was assembled in 134d08 (PR #1638, merged in 9aebc8 ). 

Theorem 5.1 (Self‑improvement assembly and the remaining SDP proof ( 9aebc8 , 652887 )) . The theorem 

selfImprovement takes test goodness (𝜀, 𝛿, 𝛾) , the measurement 𝐺 , and input consistency ℎcons , assembling the verified self‑improvement guarantee through four mathematical stages: (i) Primal‑dual SDP solution with slackness: Solving the semidefinite program (Section C.4) yields optimal sub‑measurements {𝑇 𝑔 } and dual matrix 𝑍 satisfying complementary slackness. (ii) Completeness transfer via input consistency: Combining input consistency ℎcons with slackness bounds the total defect 𝐼 − ∑ 𝑔 𝑇 𝑔 on the strategy state. (iii) Strong self‑consistency and orthonormalization: Establishing strong self‑consistency on the helper out‑ puts permits Gram orthonormalization into exact projectors. (iv) Final error aggregation: Bounding the cumulative difference against 𝐺 yields ∑𝑔 ‖𝑇 𝑔 − 𝐺 𝑔 ‖1 ≤ 𝜁 , discharg‑ ing the fields of SelfImprovementConclusion .PR #1708 ( 652887 ) closed the remaining SDP complementary slackness obligation. With this step proved, selfIm-provement depended only on the standard axioms. 

## C.4 Case study III: semidefinite duality and the false assumption 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 

C.4.1 Primal feasibility and Slater constraint qualification 

Lemma 9.1 of Ji et al. [22] considers the block semidefinite program: sup 

> {𝑇 𝑔 }

∑

> 𝑔

Tr (𝑇 𝑔 𝐴 𝑔 ) subject to 𝑇 𝑔 ⪰ 0, ∑ 

> 𝑔

𝑇 𝑔 ⪯ 𝐼, (S15) with dual constraint 𝑍 ⪰ 𝐴 𝑔 for all 𝑔 , minimizing Tr (𝑍) . Restricting primal variables to complete measure‑ ments ( ∑𝑔 𝑇 𝑔 = 𝐼 ) excludes the strict Slater interior point 𝑇 strict  

> 𝑔

= 12𝑀 𝐼 , since ∑𝑔 𝑇 𝑔 = 12 𝐼 ≺ 𝐼 . PR #251 (9747be ) expanded the feasible set to sub‑measurements ∑𝑔 𝑇 𝑔 ⪯ 𝐼 . Strict dual feasibility is supplied by 

𝑍 strict = 2𝐼 , satisfying 𝑍 − 𝐴 𝑔 ⪰ 𝐼 ≻ 0 .

C.4.2 A counterexample to 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 

Early matrix definitions ( 3685be ) attempted to deduce primal saturation ∑𝑔 𝑇 𝑔 = 𝐼 from the canonical slack equation (𝐼 − ∑ 𝑔 𝑇 𝑔 )𝑍 = 0 by assuming operator dominance: 

𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 . (S16) This condition fails for general quantum strategies. Consider a single polynomial outcome ( 𝑀 = 1 ) on 

ℋ = ℂ with 𝐴 𝑔 0 = 12 𝐼 . The optimal dual variable is 𝑍 = 12 𝐼 . Then 𝑍 − 𝐴 𝑔 0 = 0 ⪰ 0 , so 𝑍 is dual feasible and optimal with Tr (𝑍) = 1/2 = Tr (𝑇 𝑔 0 𝐴 𝑔 0 ). However: 

𝑍 − 𝐼 = 12 𝐼 − 𝐼 = − 12 𝐼̸⪰0 ⟹ 𝐼̸⪯𝑍 . (S17) The dominance hypothesis is false in general and cannot be supplied by Chapter 7 callers. 36 C.4.3 Saturating the slack while preserving the objective 

The verified proof (PR #1708, 652887 ) proves canonical strong duality 𝑃(𝑋) = 𝐷(𝑍) directly via finite‑ dimensional convex cone separation. The Slack Mass Saturation Lemma (67715a ) transfers the positive slack block 𝑆 = 𝐼 − ∑ 𝑔 𝑇 𝑔 ⪰ 0 into a distinguished polynomial block 𝑔 ∗:

˜𝑇 𝑔 ∗ ≔ 𝑇 𝑔 ∗ + 𝑆, ˜𝑇 𝑔 ≔ 𝑇 𝑔 for 𝑔 ≠ 𝑔 ∗ . (S18) Then ∑𝑔 ˜𝑇 𝑔 = 𝐼 , and weak duality shows that the objective remains optimal: 

𝑃(𝑋) ≤ 𝑃(𝑋 sat ) ≤ 𝐷(𝑍) = 𝑃(𝑋) ⟹ 𝑃(𝑋 sat ) = 𝑃(𝑋) = 𝐷(𝑍) . (S19) Commits 3e09f4 , c303e5 , and 6339ab removed all intermediate declarations that assumed 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 .

## C.5 Case study IV: consistency under rounding and completion 

C.5.1 IV.a Line 169: bounding consistency before completion 

In Section 3 of the paper, Line 169 applies triangle substitution to replace 𝐺 A with its completed projective measurement 𝑄 A, claiming the same consistency error: 

𝐺 A 

> 𝑔

⊗ 𝐼 ≃ 𝜁 1 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐺 B 

> 𝑔

, 𝐺 A 

> 𝑔

⊗ 𝐼 ≈ 𝜁 2 𝑄 A 

> 𝑔

⊗ 𝐼 ⟹ 𝑄 A 

> 𝑔

⊗ 𝐼 ≃ 𝜁 1 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐺 B 

> 𝑔

. (S20) Substitution using state‑dependent closeness ≈𝜁 2 adds a square‑root error term, giving 𝜁 1 + √𝜁 2.PR #1190 ( 1dd593 , issue #1099) resolved this by comparing 𝐺 A against the pre‑completion sub‑measurement 

𝑃 A instead. Because 𝐺 A ≈100𝜁 1/4 1

𝑃 A, the match‑mass loss is bounded by √100𝜁 1/4 1 = 10𝜁 1/8 1 . Completion at a distinguished outcome 𝑔 0 cannot decrease the match mass: 

∑

> 𝑔

⟨𝜓|(𝑄 A 

> 𝑔

⊗ 𝐺 B 

> 𝑔

)|𝜓⟩ ≥ ∑ 

> 𝑔

⟨𝜓|(𝑃 A 

> 𝑔

⊗ 𝐺 B 

> 𝑔

)|𝜓⟩, (completeAtOutcomeProj_left_matchMass_ge ). 

(S21) This yields the corrected bound: 

𝑄 A 

> 𝑔

⊗ 𝐼 ≃ 𝜁 1 + 10𝜁 1/8 1

𝐼 ⊗ 𝐺 B 

> 𝑔

, (S22) 

The extra term in 𝜁 2. Completing an orthonormalized sub‑measurement with self‑consistency error 𝜁 1

adds an unstated term +2𝜁 1. PR #909 ( 1ad5f9 ) increased the Step 6 coefficient in cascadeZeta2 from the printed 40 to 42 :

𝜁 2 = 200𝜁 1/4 1 + 42𝜁 1/8 1 . (S23) To see how these repairs fit the final error bound, let 𝜎 be the value of mainInductionError at 

(params , 𝑘, 3𝜀, 3𝜀, 3𝜀) , and let 𝜈 final = mainFormalError (params , 𝑘, 𝜀) . For 0 ≤ 𝜀 , 400𝑚𝑑 ≤ 𝑘 , 0 < 𝑘 ,and 𝜈 final < 1 , the scalar comparison uses 

𝜁 1 = 2𝜎 + 2√3𝜀 + 2𝜎 + 𝑚𝑑/𝑞, 𝜁 2 = 200𝜁 1/4 1 + 42𝜁 1/8 1 , 𝜁 3 = 6𝜁 1 + 6𝜁 2. (S24) The corrected point‑consistency bound is 

𝜁 repaired  

> 4

= 2𝜎 + 2√ 𝜁 1 + 10𝜁 1/8 1 + 𝜁 3/2 ≤ 𝜈 final . (S25) This is MainFormalScalarBounds.zeta4Repaired_le_mainFormalError .The final proof in mainFormalConclusion_ofRoleRegisterScalarBoundary bounds its point‑consistency error by 𝜁 repaired  

> 4

and applies this inequality. 37 C.5.2 IV.b Sub‑measurement total‑overlap displacement 𝜂 

When applying triangle substitution to sub‑measurements, the total operators ˆ𝐻 tot = ∑ 𝑔 ˆ𝐻 𝑔 ⪯ 𝐼 and 𝐻 tot =∑𝑔 𝐻 𝑔 ⪯ 𝐼 do not sum to identity. Substituting sub‑measurements introduces an unstated total‑overlap displacement parameter: 

𝜂 ≔ 𝔼 𝑢 ||⟨𝜓|𝐴 𝑢  

> tot

⊗ (𝐻 tot − ˆ 𝐻 tot )|𝜓⟩| |, (S26) yielding ConsRel (𝜓, 𝐴, 𝐻, 𝛿 + √𝜀 DP + 𝜂 ) .PR #1239 ( dc2fae ) proved the Cauchy–Schwarz bound: 

𝜂 ≤ √|𝔽 𝑞 |𝜀 DP (final_fields_total_difference_le_sqrt_card_data ). (S27) This cardinality‑dependent estimate is an intermediate bound. The final assembly in 134d08 uses com‑ pleteness transfer to control both signs of the difference of total expectations. Write ̂ 𝜁 ,̂ 𝜁 ortho , and ̂ 𝜁 DP for the helper, orthogonalization, and data‑processing errors at (params , 𝜀, 𝛿) . Because 𝐴 𝑢 is complete, 𝐴 𝑢  

> tot

= 𝐼 ,and the bound is 

𝜂 = | |⟨𝜓|𝐼 ⊗ (𝐻 tot − ˆ 𝐻 tot )|𝜓⟩| | ≤̂ 𝜁 + 2√̂𝜁 ortho . (S28) Thus the corrected point‑consistency error satisfies 

2̂𝜁 + √̂𝜁 DP + 2√̂𝜁 ortho ≤ selfImprovementError (params , 𝜀, 𝛿). (S29) The scalar inequality assumes 0 ≤ 𝜀, 𝛿 ≤ 1 and 𝑑 ≤ 𝑞 ; the proof treats the other parameter ranges separately. The proof passes this total‑difference bound to final_fields_of_helper_outputs_of_total_difference .Its scalar estimate is final_fields_point_consistency_total_difference_error_le_selfImprovement Error . The earlier wrapper in PR #1348 ( ec5277 ) requires a right‑total monotonicity hypothesis; it does not absorb √|𝔽 𝑞 |𝜀 DP into the final threshold. 

## C.6 Case study V: rerandomization graph Laplacian and centered variance trace 

While the graph Laplacian and variance trace identities are derived within Chapters 5 and 6, their early shortcut definitions directly blocked downstream composition in Chapter 7. The self‑improvement step in Chapter 7 required an operator inequality 𝐿 ⪰ 𝜆 2(𝐼 − 𝐽/𝑀) that can only be deduced from the Dirichlet edge‑ sum decomposition; a tautological definition alias prevented downstream proofs from accessing edge‑level expansion properties. 

C.6.1 Proving the Laplacian identity from edge sums 

The expansion argument expresses the Laplacian 𝐿 = 𝑀 −1 𝐼 − 𝐾 of the coordinate rerandomization graph as an average of edge differences: 

𝐿 = 12 ∑

> 𝑢,𝑣∈𝔽 𝑚 𝑞

𝑊(𝑢, 𝑣)(|𝑢⟩ − |𝑣⟩)(⟨𝑢| − ⟨𝑣|). (S30) An early draft ( 78a14c , 27 March 2026) defined the operator tautologically: 

𝐿 diff ≔ 𝑀 −1 𝐼 − 𝐾 (laplacianRewrite := rfl ) . (S31) The verified proof (PR #1033, 020fc9 , a3fcfc ) defines (𝐿 diff )𝑎,𝑏 entrywise as a weighted sum over ordered pairs and proves entrywise equality with (𝑀 −1 𝐼 − 𝐾) 𝑎,𝑏 using transition symmetry 𝑊(𝑢, 𝑣) = 𝑊(𝑣, 𝑢) and marginal row sums ∑𝑣 𝑊(𝑢, 𝑣) = 𝑀 −1 .38 C.6.2 Replacing zero residuals by centered operators 

Self‑improvement expresses global variance as a trace over centered residuals: 

𝐴 𝑢 ⟂ = 𝐴 𝑢 − 𝐴 avg , 𝐴 avg = 1𝑀 ∑

> 𝑢

𝐴 𝑢 , ∑

> 𝑢

𝐴 𝑢 ⟂ = 0. (S32) Commit de9a97 stored the constant Fourier coefficient 𝐴 0 = 𝑀 −1/2 ∑𝑢 𝐴 𝑢 = √𝑀 𝐴 avg , but set both fields for the orthogonal component to zero: 

𝐴 ⟂ ≔ 0 . (S33) PR #542 ( ef0768 ) constructed the centered residual family 𝑢 ↦ 𝐴 𝑢 − 𝐴 avg , proved ∑𝑢 𝐴 𝑢 ⟂ = 0 , and obtained the trace identity: globalVariance (𝐴, 𝜓) = 1𝑀 ∑

> 𝑢∈𝔽 𝑚 𝑞

ev 𝜓 ((𝐴 𝑢 ⟂)†𝐴 𝑢 ⟂) (globalVarianceTraceForm_eq_closedForm ). (S34) 

## C.7 Case study VI: interpolation support and degree‑zero pasting 

C.7.1 Replacing default zero by interpolation on the support 

Definition 12.8 of Ji et al. [22] reconstructs an (𝑚 + 1) ‑variate polynomial from slice outcomes (𝑔 1, … , 𝑔 𝑘 ) ∈ (Poly ∪{⊥}) 𝑘 . Commit 3cc379 returned the zero polynomial for an empty slice: extractSliceOr0 (⊥) ≔ 0 . (S35) The zero polynomial satisfies the degree bound, so that part of the proof compiled. Its evaluation is always 

0, however, so it does not give the point consistency needed for empty slices in the Chapter 10 induction. PR #495 and PR #561 ( 64ae1b , c77bc0 ) eliminated extractSliceOr0 and packaged the interpolation support into InterpolationSupportWitness :               

> -- Schematic excerpt from commit 64ae1b
> structure InterpolationSupportWitness (params) (gs : Fin k -> GHatOutcome params) where
> support : Finset (Fin k) subset_support : support <= gHatTupleSupport gs card_eq : support.card = params.d +1

The input to interpolateCompletedSlicesFromSupport includes a proof that all interpolation nodes lie in the support: 𝜎 ⊆ supp (𝑔) .

C.7.2 Degree‑zero pasting and the missing 0 < 𝑘 hypothesis 

When 𝑑 = 0 , polynomials are constant along the appended coordinate (Poly (𝑚 + 1, 𝑞, 0) ≅ Poly (𝑚, 𝑞, 0) ). PR #1643 ( 88c323 ) formalized this separate construction by defining the height‑averaged sub‑measurement 

averagedSliceAppendedSubMeas without Lagrange interpolation. The case 𝑑 = 0 also exposed a missing hypothesis in the paper. When 𝑑 = 0 , the printed condition 𝑘 ≥ 𝑚𝑑 

permits 𝑘 = 0 . The prefactor 𝑘 2 makes the error bound zero: 

𝜈 = 100000 ⋅ 0 2 ⋅ 𝑚 4 (𝜀 1/40000 + (0/𝑞) 1/40000 + 𝑒 −0/(2560000 𝑚 2)) = 0 . (S36) Consider a strategy on ℂ where the point measurement answers 0 at point 𝑢 0 and 1 at point 𝑢 1. Setting 𝜀 = 1 ,the strategy satisfies all printed hypotheses. However, a degree‑zero polynomial is constant, so consistency at 𝑢 0 forces the answer to be 0, while consistency at 𝑢 1 forces it to be 1. No measurement can satisfy the printed conclusion at 𝜈 = 0 . The formal theorem excludes this case by requiring 0 < 𝑘 (27df27 ). 39 C.8 Case study VII: pasting telescoping sum and inductive successor arithmetic 

C.8.1 From ˆ𝐻 to 𝐺 : the telescoping sum ( 46𝑘 2𝑚 correction) 

Lemma 12.8 of Ji et al. [22] relates the ˆ𝐻 ‑mass of outcomes with type weight |𝜏| ≥ 𝑑 + 1 to a binomial tail in 

𝐺 via 𝑘 + 1 hybrid quantities 𝑀 0, … , 𝑀 𝑘 :

𝔼 𝑥 1,…,𝑥 𝑘 ∑

> 𝜏∶ |𝜏|≥𝑑+1

∑

> (𝑔 1,…,𝑔 𝑘 )∈ Outcomes 𝜏

⟨𝜓| ˆ 𝐻 𝑥 1,…,𝑥 𝑘  

> 𝑔 1,…,𝑔 𝑘

⊗ 𝐼|𝜓⟩ ≈ 𝜈 8

> 𝑘

∑

> 𝑖=𝑑+1

(𝑘 𝑖 )⟨𝜓|𝐺 𝑖 (𝐼 − 𝐺) 𝑘−𝑖 ⊗ 𝐼|𝜓⟩. (S37) Adjacent terms satisfy: 

|𝑀 𝑗−1 − 𝑀 𝑗 | ≤ Δ 𝑘 ≔ 2 √2𝜁 + 2√𝜈 4(𝑘). (S38) Because the commutation loss 𝜈 4(𝑘) ∝ 𝑘 2𝑚 already scales quadratically with 𝑘 , the term √𝜈 4(𝑘) grows lin‑ early with 𝑘 . Summing the 𝑘 differences gives: 

|𝑀 0 − 𝑀 𝑘 | ≤ 

> 𝑘

∑

> 𝑗=1

|𝑀 𝑗−1 − 𝑀 𝑗 | ≤ 𝑘Δ 𝑘 ≤ 46 𝑘 2𝑚 (𝛾 1/32 + 𝜁 1/32 + (𝑑/𝑞) 1/32 ) . (S39) Commit 15df91 corrected the paper’s misprinted factor 46𝑘𝑚 to 46𝑘 2𝑚 in fromHToGError .The additive Chernoff bound at threshold 𝜃 = 1/(200𝑚) requires 𝑘 ≥ 2𝑑/𝜃 = 400𝑚𝑑 . The same‑space theorem adopted this restriction in PR #912 ( 805e89 ); 78d56a later confirmed it for the reopened induction step. Section B.1.3 distinguishes these stages. 

C.8.2 Inductive error growth at 𝑚 = 1 

In the inductive step from dimension 𝑚 to 𝑚 + 1 , the printed paper absorbed coefficients via: 

(1 + 1100𝑚 ) (𝑚 2 + 3) ≤ (𝑚 + 1) 2 , (S40) claiming the inequality holds “because 𝑚 ≥ 2 ”. At the induction base step 𝑚 = 1 , this fails: 

(1.01)(1 2 + 3) = 4.04 > 4 = (1 + 1) 2 . (S41) PR #552 ( 70aa84 ) proved the sharper pasting bound 𝜈 paste ≤ 15 𝜈 ind . The theorem is ldPastingInInduc-tionNu_le_fifth_mainInductionNu . Regrouping the successor error gives: 

((𝑚 2 + 1) (1 + 1100𝑚 ) + 25 ) 𝜈 ≤ (𝑚 + 1) 2𝜈. (S42) The inequality holds for all 𝑚 ≥ 1 ; at 𝑚 = 1 , it gives 2.42 ≤ 4 .

## C.9 Index of theorem inputs and outputs 

Table S5 catalogs fifteen proved connections across the ten blueprint chapters, separating cross‑chapter producer–consumer interfaces (such as spatial register lifts and Naimark dilation products) from intra‑ chapter proof repairs (such as semidefinite duality slack saturation and degree‑zero pasting) that unblocked downstream composition. 40 Table S5 | Theorem inputs and outputs. The table catalogs fifteen proved connections between modules across the ten blueprint chapters. 

Ch. 2 (Registers) 

Spatial register placement Case I 

Producer: QuantumState.eval (826b53 )

Consumer: ProjStrat (7e79c1 )Corrected Bob’s operator lift from liftLeft to liftRight , so the two provers act on separate tensor factors in ℒ(ℋ 𝐴 ) ⊗ ℒ(ℋ 𝐵 ).

Ch. 2 (Strategies) 

Role symmetrization Case I 

Producer: roleRegisterSymmStrategy (440cb0 )

Consumer: mainInduction (c31419 )Embedded ℋ𝐴 ⊕ ℋ 𝐵 into role space 𝒦 role via localDirectSumBlock , constructing a permutation‑invariant strategy without requiring equal local dimensions. 

Ch. 2 (Subtests) 

Agreement to self‑consistency Case I 

Producer: point_agreement_le_three_mul (9645d3 )

Consumer: roleRegisterSymmStrategy_selfConsistency (9645d3 )Proved that test failure probability ≤ 𝜀 bounds cross‑prover agreement error by 3𝜀 ,giving a self‑consistency error of at most 3𝜀 for the symmetrized strategy. 

Ch. 10 (Induction) 

Strategies on each slice Case I 

Producer: AnswerSuccessorRestrictedFailureProfile (440cb0 )

Consumer: answerSuccessorRestrictedSliceConclusions (440cb0 )Constructed a strategy for each slice 𝑥 ∈ 𝔽 𝑞 and reindexed the error averages using Fubini; the earlier declarations gave only equalities between errors. 

Ch. 7 (Self‑Imp.) 

Self‑improvement assembly Case II 

Producer: selfImprovementHelper (5f0fc8 )

Consumer: selfImprovementInInductionSection (134d08 )Derived point‑indexed relations over 𝔽 𝑚 𝑞 from Unit‑indexed ones, assembling helper completeness, strong self‑consistency, and orthonormalization. 

Ch. 7 (SDP) 

SDP primal sub‑measurements Case III 

Producer: sdpStrictPrimalSubMeas (ca96c4 )

Consumer: matrixSdpCanonicalStrongDuality (e4ca6d )Enlarged the primal feasible set from complete measurements to sub‑measurements, supplying the strict Slater interior point 𝑇 𝑔 = 12𝑀 𝐼 with total mass 12 𝐼 ≺ 𝐼 .

Ch. 7 (SDP) 

SDP slack mass saturation Case III 

Producer: matrixSdpCanonicalSaturateSlackBlockMatrix (67715a )

Consumer: sdp_statement_with_slackness (31c8e3 )Added the slack block 𝑆 to 𝑔 ∗ and applied weak duality 𝑃(𝑋) ≤ 𝑃(𝑋 sat ) ≤ 𝐷(𝑍) = 𝑃(𝑋) ,removing the false dominance hypothesis 𝐼 ⪯ 𝑍 .

Ch. 4 (Rounding) 

Line‑169 consistency bound Case IV.a 

Producer: completeAtOutcomeProj_left_matchMass_ge (1dd593 )

Consumer: mainFormalConclusion (cd148c )Bounded the loss of match mass against the sub‑measurement 𝑃 𝐴 before completion, then proved that completion cannot decrease it, giving error 𝜁 1 + 10𝜁 1/8 1 .

Ch. 3 (Prelim.) 

Total‑overlap displacement Case IV.b 

Producer: completenessTransferProjectiveP (134d08 )

Consumer: selfImprovement (134d08 )Bounded total‑overlap displacement by 𝜂 ≤̂ 𝜁 + 2√̂𝜁 ortho using completeness transfer, then absorbed the resulting point‑consistency error into selfImprovementError .

Ch. 5 (Expansion) 

Rerandomization graph Laplacian Case V 

Producer: rerandomizeCoordWeight_symm (a3fcfc )

Consumer: laplacian_eq_edgeDifferenceForm (a3fcfc )Proved entrywise equality 𝐿 = 𝑀 −1 𝐼 − 𝐾 from coordinate‑swap symmetry 

𝑊(𝑢, 𝑣) = 𝑊(𝑣, 𝑢) and marginal sums, replacing an identity made true by definition. 

Chapter / interface / case Declarations and repair 

Continued on next page 

41 Ch. 6 (Variance) 

Centered global variance trace Case V 

Producer: canonicalGlobalVarianceDecomposition (ef0768 )

Consumer: globalVarianceTraceForm_eq_closedForm (ef0768 )Constructed the centered residual family 𝐴 𝑢 ⟂ = 𝐴 𝑢 − 𝐴 avg with ∑𝑢 𝐴 𝑢 ⟂ = 0 , proving the global variance trace identity. 

Ch. 9 (Pasting) 

Supported Lagrange interpolation Case VI 

Producer: InterpolationSupportWitness (64ae1b )

Consumer: interpolateCompletedSlicesFromSupport (c77bc0 )Replaced the default value extractSliceOr0 (⊥) ≔ 0 with interpolation on a support set of size |𝜎| = 𝑑 + 1 , preserving point consistency. 

Ch. 9 (Pasting) 

Degree‑zero pasting completion Case VI 

Producer: averagedSliceAppendedSubMeas (88c323 )

Consumer: degreeZeroPastedPointConsistency (88c323 )Completed height‑averaged sub‑measurements at degree 𝑑 = 0 without interpolation, treating arbitrary 𝑘 by cases. The top‑level 0 < 𝑘 correction is a separate soundness obligation (§C.7.2). 

Ch. 9 (Pasting) 

Pasting telescoping sum Case VII 

Producer: fromHToGStageMass (15df91 )

Consumer: fromHToG_bound (15df91 )Summed 𝑘 differences between adjacent hybrid terms to obtain the binomial‑tail bound, correcting the misprinted error factor to 𝜈 8 = 46𝑘 2𝑚 .

Ch. 10 (Induction) 

Successor error regrouping Case VII 

Producer: ldPastingInInductionNu_le_fifth_mainInductionNu (70aa84 )

Consumer: mainInductionSuccessorNext (70aa84 )Proved 𝜈 paste ≤ 15 𝜈 ind to close the base step 𝑚 = 1 via (𝑚 2 + 1)(1.01) + 2/5 = 2.42 ≤ 4 ,fixing the printed failure (1.01)(4) = 4.04 > 4 .

Chapter / interface / case Declarations and repair 

42 D Verification tools and proof integrity checks 

## D.1 Overview 

An interactive theorem prover checks that a proof has its declared type [33, 36]. Reviewers must still check whether that type states the intended theorem from the papers [20, 22]. A declaration can pass type checking by assuming the conclusion as a hypothesis, taking unproved intermediate results as structure fields, or constructing a witness on a trivial space. We implemented five checks for these shortcuts, alongside mathematical review (Table S6). Table S7 sum‑ marizes when each of the five checks began reporting findings and when findings began to block merges. Between mid‑April and mid‑May 2026, we merged 74 commits updating agent instructions, automated re‑ view prompts, and continuous integration workflows; 29 directly updated prompt and policy configurations. Agent instructions, reviewer prompts, automated repair loops, maintainer checklists, and CI scanners all checked for hypotheses that assume the conclusion and helper structures whose fields had not been proved. 

Table S6 | The five automated checks for proof shortcuts and statement changes. 

Check Target Mechanism Action on failure 

1. Conclusion‑shaped hypotheses (§D.2) Proof evasion Parses binders in theorem signatures; matches conclusion predicates in hypotheses Fails continuous integration (PR #1511) 2. Proof debt in paper‑facing headers (§D.2) Auxiliary obligations Scans blueprint‑linked declarations for warning terms Fails continuous integration (PR #1511) 3. Helper structure reviews (§D.3) Unused helpers Requires constructor, consumer, or issue Maintainers block merge; reviewed PRs remove unused structures (PR #1440) 4. Kernel axiom audits (§D.4) Axiom leaks Inspects environment with 

Lean.collectAxioms 

Elaboration fails when unexpected axioms appear (PR #416) 5. Blueprint synchronization (§D.5) Unverified green nodes Cross‑references blueprint tags with Lean definitions and docstrings Rejects unexpected warning terms in CI on paper‑facing nodes (PR #1767) 

43 Table S7 | Evolution of the five checks from reporting to blocking. 

Date Shortcut observed Check introduced Status over time 

15 April 2026 Classical soundness proof omitted;  

> sorryAx

in transitive axioms (issue #408). Kernel axiom audits (PR #416). Blocking from introduction; relaxed once for 14 min (commit 3aeb70 , 20 May); restored (commit fc7376 ). 26 April 2026 Hypotheses that assume the conclusion (SelfImprovementBridgePackage ,issue #493). Conclusion‑shaped hypothesis scanner (PR #784). Report‑only from 26 April (PR #784); blocking from 11 May (PR #1511). 09 May 2026 Unused helper structures and unproved intermediate fields (issue #1381). Helper structure reviews (PR #1440). Enforced via maintainer review checklist and PR review audits. 11 May 2026 Names for unproved obligations ( Bridge ,

> Package

, …) in headers of blueprint‑linked theorems (issue #1458). Proof‑debt scanner (PR #1475). Report‑only in PR #1475; --ci 

added in PR #1506; blocking from 11 May (PR #1511). 20 May 2026 Green blueprint nodes with warning terms in docstrings or linked declaration names (issue #1693). Blueprint synchronization audit (PR #1767). Blocking from introduction, with explicit allowances for justified uses. 

## D.2 Checks 1 and 2: hypothesis and proof‑debt scanners 

These checks detect theorems whose statements differ from the paper by assuming unproved results. Check 1 inspects the binder structure of each theorem. Check 2 inspects public declaration names and type signatures for stems used for unproved obligations. 

D.2.1 Implementation 

The hypothesis scanner parses theorem signatures into hypotheses and conclusions. It flags hypotheses that share predicates with the conclusion. The proof‑debt scanner checks blueprint‑linked theorems against a list of stems used for unproved obligations: 

ForbiddenStems ≔ { Bridge , Residual , Repair , Package , Input , Producer , Hypotheses , Assumptions , … }. 

The declaration audit blocks direct axiom and constant commands in source code. 

D.2.2 Historical example: SelfImprovementBridgePackage 

The named package introduced on 9 April 2026 ( 48d147 ) and the later inline‑existential variant documented in issue #493 are the two forms these scanners check. The proof‑debt scanner flags named obligations; the conclusion scanner compares inline existential binders with their conclusions. Supplementary Appendix B details the statement repairs, and Section C.3 gives the assembled proof. The statement was restored in PR #1462, the proof assembled in PR #1638, and the SDP step proved in PR #1708. 

## D.3 Check 3: helper structure reviews and scaffolding removal 

This check prevents unproved obligations from persisting in auxiliary data structures. Proving agents intro‑ duced intermediate structures to bundle hypotheses, intermediate operators, or witness candidates. With‑ out review, these structures can hide proof obligations from the scanners. 44 D.3.1 Requirements for merging 

Before approving a merge, maintainers require one of the following for each intermediate data structure (issue #1379): 1. an explicit constructor theorem deriving the structure from established premises, 2. an explicit consumer theorem using the structure to prove a required step, or 3. an issue specifying what remains to be proved. The review‑and‑fix loop stops automated repairs after five consecutive tagged repair commits. 

D.3.2 Historical example: removing unused structures 

After reviewing helper declarations, we removed unused scaffolding structures and temporary input abbre‑ viations (such as intermediate Naimark, rounding, and spectral‑truncation witness structures) in PR #1440 (bb1839 , issue #1381). The QXPLayerData repair replaced assumed structure fields with a mathematical construction. Supplemen‑ tary Appendix B traces its successive repairs; reviewers check which theorems construct these fields and which proof steps use them. 

## D.4 Check 4: kernel axiom audits 

This check verifies that core theorems do not depend, directly or through other declarations, on unfinished proofs ( sorryAx ) or custom mathematical axioms. 

D.4.1 Implementation 

Continuous integration runs the in‑kernel axiom audit. Its assertions inspect transitive axiom dependencies with Lean.collectAxioms and fail elaboration when the expected axiom condition is violated. Section A.4 specifies the two assertions and their application to the completed proof. 

D.4.2 Historical examples: unfinished proofs and a relaxed axiom check 

The classical soundness placeholder in PR #407 motivated the audit. An automated tracker flagged its tran‑ sitive sorryAx dependency (issue #408), and c530eb reverted the pull request. In PR #416, we made the unproved classical premise explicit and added an axiom audit for the quantum theorem. Supplementary Appendix B details this transition. The axiom audit detects axiom dependencies; reviewers must inspect assumptions written as explicit hypotheses. On 20 May 2026, selfImprovement temporarily depended on a helper with a sorry tracked in issue #1642. In an automated repair session on PR #1734, an agent modified the test harness in commit 3aeb70 , adding  

> sorry

to expectedSelfImprovementAxioms and expectedInductionSelfImprovementAxioms in an attempt to satisfy a failing CI run. This test‑harness tampering was caught during an audit fourteen minutes later; commit fc7376 restored both lists to the standard axioms and rewrote the proof to remove the unfinished helper. The pull request merged later that day with the strict axiom check restored; the relaxed configura‑ tion never reached the main branch. This was the only instance during the formalization where an agent relaxed the axiom verification harness. 45 D.5 Check 5: blueprint synchronization and declaration checks 

This check flags blueprint nodes that appear complete (green) in the dependency graph but link to substitute statements or helper declarations that assume unproved results. 

D.5.1 Implementation 

We manage the mathematical blueprint with Massot’s leanblueprint tool [19] and check its Lean links with two scripts. The blueprint synchronization check reads the L ATEX blueprint files, extracts all \lean and 

\leanok tags, and checks that the linked declarations exist in the Lean codebase. The green‑node audit searches linked declaration names and public headers for terms used for unproved obligations and checks their immediate docstrings for **Unfaithful:** markers. It reports these matches and, in --ci mode, rejects unexpected matches on nodes that state results from the paper, except for listed allowances. Math‑ ematical review determines whether a flagged hypothesis belongs to the displayed statement. 

D.5.2 Historical example: reviewing green nodes with warning terms 

In PR #1767 (issue #1693), we added the green‑node integrity audit and committed its findings at e3d697 .The audit identified links whose names suggested unproved obligations and compared them with the dis‑ played blueprint statements. For example, SliceBoundednessInput.storedBoundedResidualBound states a boundedness assumption already present in the displayed commutativity claim. Among the green nodes checked against the paper, the audit found none that assumed an obligation absent from the displayed state‑ ment. The script reports unexpected links; it does not remove \leanok tags. 

## D.6 Mathematical review 

We compared formal statements and the lemmas used to prove them with the argument in the LIDT paper. For example, the interpolation sentinel compiled but failed to provide point consistency on empty slices; Section C.7.1 gives its replacement by support‑certified interpolation. The Line‑169 transport required an additional error estimate; Section C.5.1 gives the repaired bound. Reviewers must therefore check that each lemma supplies the quantities required by the next proof step, even when both declarations type‑check. 

## D.7 Measuring the checks 

Tables S6 and S7 summarize the scope and deployment history of each check. We measured how often the scanners flagged patterns on the main branch, how long known shortcuts took to detect, and which pull requests failed the blocking CI checks. 

D.7.1 Running the final scanners on earlier snapshots 

We ran the final versions of the automated scanners on 23 dated snapshots of the main branch between 7 March and 5 June 2026. We used the same matching rules for every snapshot. The counts include only variants that these rules detect. Figure S3 shows the proof‑debt scanner’s findings. Flagged paper‑facing declarations rose from 1 on 22 March to 63 on 6 May 2026, before the proof‑debt scanner entered continuous integration. On 11 May, the scan merged in report‑only mode (PR #1475, 12:46 UTC). The --ci flag was added that evening (PR #1506, 20:31 UTC), and PR #1511 made scanner failures fail the CI job at 23:27 UTC. The count dropped to zero that day and remained zero across all eight subsequent snapshots through 5 June, when the scanner covered 487 paper‑facing declarations. The remaining SDP proof obligation closed later in PR #1708. The scanner flags four issues in the 9 April snapshot, including the selfImprovement shortcut introduced that day in 48d147 .The conclusion‑shaped hypothesis scanner found no matches in the same 23 snapshots except on 21 April 2026. The number of declarations scanned grew from 44 to 2,602. Daily April snapshots show when this hypothesis appeared and was removed. An inline existential hypothesis on mainInduction entered the main branch through PR #491 on 18 April. It was removed on 23 April while the surrounding bridge structure was refactored. By the time the report‑only scan merged three days later (PR #784), review in issue #493 had 46 Paper‑facing statements scanned 487     

> 11 May: report‑only at 12:46,
> --ci added at 20:31 UTC 63 on 6 May 0 through 5 June
> First finding, 22 March
> 1 Mar 1 Apr 1 May 1 Jun
> 020 40 63
> 2026 Findings on paper‑facing theorems

Figure S3 | Findings before and after we added the proof‑debt scanner. We ran the current proof‑debt de‑ tector, unmodified, over 23 verified snapshots of the repository’s main branch using the same matching rules for every snapshot. The blue curve counts its findings on paper‑facing theorems at each snapshot; the grey curve, drawn to its own scale, is the number of paper‑facing statements the detector scanned. The dashed vertical line marks 11 May 2026, the day the scan entered continuous integration in report‑only mode. The --ci flag was added eight hours later; PR #1511 made scanner failures fail the CI job that night. Data: data/m1_proof_debt_replay.csv .identified the issue, and the refactoring had removed it. After the scanner became blocking on 11 May (PR #1511), the finding count remained at zero across all eight subsequent snapshots without expanding the scanner’s allowlist. 

D.7.2 How long the shortcuts survived 

Table S8 details when the three shortcuts in Supplementary Appendix B were introduced, detected, and repaired. From 11 May, findings covered by the blocking rules fail the CI checks. Both scanners run on pull requests that change Lean files; the proof‑debt scanner also runs on blueprint changes. 47 Table S8 | Time from introduction to first observed detection for the three documented shortcuts. We mea‑ sure to the first issue, review comment, or failing check logged in the repository. The repairs followed on 1–2 May 2026 for the Laplacian alias (the PR #1033 chain), the same night for the rounding statement (PR #287, with the construction proved in PR #652, PR #726, and PR #1126), and 11 May 2026 for the selfImprovement 

statement (PR #1462).         

> Pattern Introduced First observed detection Detected by Latency
> Definitional alias of the Laplacian, closed by rfl
> 27 Mar 2026 (78a14c )25 Apr 2026, 00:46 UTC: a review fix on PR #721 drops \leanok from the blueprint node as a “vacuous tautology”. Automated reviewers checking blueprint tags 29 days Rounding witness on a one‑point space ( R = [1] ,
> PUnit carrier) 9 Apr 2026, 20:45 UTC (PR #274) Same day: a review bot’s risk note in the body of the introducing pull request, then issue #279 filed 19 minutes after merge. Automated pull‑request review that did not block the merge; an issue was then filed under the owner account Under 1 day (flagged before merge, then merged) Conclusion‑shaped hypotheses on
> selfImprovement
> 9 Apr 2026, named stem (48d147 ); 18 Apr 2026, inline existentials (PR #491) 18 Apr 2026, 04:13 UTC: issue #493 names PR #491 before its 11:34 UTC merge; 10 May 2026, 05:42 UTC: issue #1453 flagged the unproved named package. Review filed as a tracker issue 0 days for inline form; 31 days to the issue about the named package

D.7.3 Failures reported by blocking checks 

Three CI audit jobs ran these checks on pull requests that changed the files covered by each job, from 11–12 May 2026 until 16 July 2026. A single workflow ( 343bf0 ) then combined the jobs without changing their commands. Across 4,113 logged pull‑request runs during this period, 49 failed. Of these, 42 were transient infrastructure failures (such as runner timeouts, checkout errors, or empty job steps). Only seven failures arose from substantive verification checks: five caused by unfaithful blueprint markers and one caused by proof debt, while the conclusion‑shaped scanner gave consistent reports of unproved obligations. On the inspected branches, the flagged Lean or blueprint content was repaired, and the pull requests merged with passing checks. This distribution reflects that the vast majority of shortcut attempts and mathematical drift were caught and repaired earlier in the workflow—during interactive agent sessions and pull‑request review discussions—before changes reached the merge gate. Continuous integration functioned primarily as an automated safety net against regressions rather than the primary discovery mechanism. We counted each run’s latest attempt, so a failed attempt followed by a successful retry does not appear in the failure list. The proof‑debt scanner ran in report‑only mode for eight hours, too briefly for a comparison with the blocking period. The raw CI logs have expired; we used archived step statuses and branch history to classify the failures. 48 E GitHub task tracking, agent contributions, and model usage 

## E.1 From proof decomposition to session instructions 

A saved continuation prompt begins:     

> Continue to address the opened issues.

The rest of the prompt asks for parallel subagents, separate worktrees, cleanup and refactoring, blueprint synchronization, and merging after reviews agree and review threads are resolved, followed by work on the next issues. The issues supplied the obligations and dependencies; the paper, blueprint, and repository instructions supplied the mathematical context and checks. The agent could therefore resume work from this record, submit a proof for review, address the comments, and continue with the next task. GitHub workflows also invoked Claude Code and Codex from issue and pull‑request discussions, and Open‑ Code from comments. These workflows supplied the request together with standing instructions for pre‑ serving the paper’s mathematical statements. 

## E.2 Tracking proof tasks 

We used tracking issues to organize proof tasks as they arose during formalization. Initially, we listed pend‑ ing tasks as Markdown checkboxes in each tracking issue. Editing a checklist did not update the underlying issue hierarchy, so the checklist could disagree with the child issues. We resolved this by making GitHub native sub‑issues the task tree, while the issue description retained the narrative explanation of the task. Only native parent–child relations defined the task tree. The tracker for the quantum‑soundness theorem (issue #422) is an example. Its description lists five issues for assembling the theorem (issue #423–issue #427). The native hierarchy contains 17 sub‑issues: we added tasks as the proof required auxiliary lemmas and connections between intermediate results. For any tracking issue, GitHub computes completion as the fraction of closed sub‑issues. GitHub counts a child when its state is CLOSED and separately tracks why it was closed. To complete the proof task, we also check the proof in Lean and review whether its statement proves the required result. The tracking workflow counts closed children and posts a comment when a triggering event finds every child closed. Closing the parent remains a separate action. At the audited August revision, the job runs after reopening a child, closing a child as completed, and opening or merging a non‑fork pull request; a child closed as not planned does not itself trigger this job. 

## E.3 From body checklists to native sub‑issues 

As the formalization grew, we changed how the tracker logged child tasks. Figure S4 reconstructs the two representations for tracker issue #422. Table S9 documents the changes from the early checklists through commit b39705 to the August revision. 49 Issue #422 on 23 April Issue body Tracked tasks 

> ```[tasklist] ### Tasks #423 #424 #425 #426 #427 #428 #470 #471 #509 ```
> Tasks recorded in editable issue text
> PR #674
> 24 Apr 2026

Issue #422 17 / 17 completed Sub‑issues native relation     

> #423--#427 direct assembly (5)
> #1037 recursive‑slice follow‑up
> #1038 answer‑side bridge
> #1507 final induction obligation + 9 further native children Sub‑issues define tasks; the body lists them
> Schematic interface view

Figure S4 | From body checklist to native sub‑issues. (Left) : the 23 April body tasklist stored six direct tasks (#423–#428) and three checked milestones (#470, #471, and #509), so editing that text changed the displayed task list. (Right) : after PR #674, issue #422’s task state came from native parent–child relations; its description still listed the tasks. At the 31 August 2026 query, all 17 native children were closed on GitHub. Grey state markers denote GitHub closure, not mathematical completion. We reconstructed the task lists here and omitted the surrounding GitHub interface. 

Table S9 | Changes to GitHub task tracking. The last column states the change in repository behavior. 

Date Reference Task state Repository behavior 

26 Mar 2026 Commit f93895 Body checklist The tracking‑issue template stored child references as Markdown checkboxes. 29 Mar 2026 Commit d6e341 Body checklist The post‑merge scan could append a new - [ ] #N entry to that list. 24 Apr 2026 PR #674; commit 4233ee 

Native sub‑issues GitHub native sub‑issues replaced Markdown checkboxes for tracking child tasks. 24 Jun 2026 Commit b39705 Native sub‑issues At commit b39705 , the merged‑PR scan created follow‑up issues, attached them to an open tracker, and logged the action. 16–17 Jul 2026 Commit bb4889 ;commit f692c9 ;commit 1c6eed ;commit 442c15 

Native sub‑issues The combined workflow kept native sub‑issues, separated completion notices, and gave progress comments a stable marker. 31 Aug 2026 Commit 507e81 Native sub‑issues Separate scripts count closed children and find follow‑up work in merged pull requests. 

With the review switch enabled, a non‑fork pull‑request merge triggers an automated review of its descrip‑ tion, review discussions, and diff. It creates issues for follow‑up work introduced by the merge, excluding completed tasks, pre‑existing sorry placeholders, and cosmetic comments. 50 Across the project, automated post‑merge follow‑up scans created 110 issues (117 bot‑created issues in total). Together with maintainer filings, follow‑up tasks accounted for 292 of the 725 issues opened in the reposi‑ tory (40.3%), concentrating in April and May 2026 during core proof formalization. For each new task, the automation creates a native sub‑issue under the relevant tracker, links the pull request, and posts an update to the tracker. In the later August revision, a separate script counts closed children, updates progress ratios, and posts state changes in comments with stable markers to avoid duplicates. It reads native issue relations and states, so edits to issue descriptions do not change the task hierarchy or trigger completion notices. 

## E.4 Issue creation and organization through GitHub Actions 

We used separate GitHub Actions workflows for classifying tasks, preparing proof strategies, and auditing dependencies for newly opened issues. 

Auto‑labeling and anchor audit. When a contributor or agent opened an issue, the Issue Classification 

workflow evaluated its title and description against the repository taxonomy. It assigned area labels (formalization , infrastructure , cleanup ), paper identifiers ( 2009.12982 ), and mathematical topic labels ( ldt-basic , pasting , proof-infra ). Beyond applying labels, the triage agent audited the issue description for necessary mathematical anchors: paper theorem references, blueprint nodes, and target Lean declaration names. It posted an initial classification comment specifying the applied labels, summa‑ rizing the technical scope, and listing missing mathematical references needed before formalization could begin. This audit helps human researchers inspect formalization progress while preventing agents from re‑deriving mathematical results already available in Mathlib. 

Automated Mathlib audit and scouting. For issues labeled formalization , the Mathlib Scout workflow performed an automated audit across Mathlib and the local codebase. The scouting agent searched for ex‑ isting lemmas, matching type signatures, and relevant algebraic structures, distinguishing results already present upstream from project‑specific gaps that required new proofs. It posted a structured scouting re‑ port directly on the issue, identifying relevant definitions, citations with file paths, and a suggested lemma decomposition. 

Scouting reports as proving prompts. These automated issue comments served as direct prompt con‑ text for subsequent proving agents. When a proving session (dispatched through Claude Code or Codex) began work on an issue, the agent read the issue description together with the triage and scouting com‑ ments. Because the scout had already identified the relevant Mathlib declarations and structured the proof into modular steps, the proving agent avoided redundant library searches and adhered to existing project conventions. 

Worked example: issue #2454. To illustrate the interaction between auto‑labeling, Mathlib scouting, and proving prompts, Section E.4 reproduce the automated comments posted to issue #2454 (a task to extract shared finite‑support lemmas from the pasting layer into a reusable API). Upon issue creation, the classification agent assigned topic labels and noted the missing declaration names (Section E.4). The Mathlib scout then audited Mathlib and the local repository, identifying exact lemmas in Math-lib.Data.Fintype.CardEmbedding and proposing a three‑lemma architecture (Section E.4). The proving agent on PR #2455 ingested this report as prompt context and implemented the exact three‑declaration plan proposed by the scout, closing the issue.     

> Auto‑labeling and initial classification comment on issue #2454
> ## Initial classification ### Labels
> Added formalization ,2009.12982 ,pasting ,proof-infra . The issue describes extracting shared finite‑support lemmas from the pasting layer into a reusable API, which fits the formalization and proof‑infrastructure categories.

51 ### Reading 

The issue identifies a repeated pattern in the pasting layer: constructing the finite support of injective point tuples, proving its cardinality via Equiv.subtypeInjectiveEquivEmbedding , and proving nonemptiness when 𝑘 ≤ 𝑞 . The goal is to move these facts next to distinctTupleDistribution so that downstream total‑variation and averaging proofs can cite a single support API. The issue does not currently give specific file paths, line numbers, the current inline declaration names, or the target Lean declaration name for the factored support API. 

### Next step 

Add the specific file paths and line numbers where the repeated support constructions currently live, and name the target Lean declaration (or declarations) that should hold the factored facts. If a blueprint anchor or LaTeX label corresponds to distinctTupleDistribution , include that reference as well. 

Mathlib scouting and audit report on issue #2454 

## Mathlib Scouting Report ### Mathematical source 

• Refactoring task: source facts are already in the repository ( MIPStarRE/LDT/Pasting/Defs/Tuples.lean , defin‑ ing distinctTuples and distinctTupleDistribution ) and downstream consumers in Core/DDistinct.lean and 

ComparisonLemmas/LineInterpolation/ .

• Goal: Factor out the finite support of injective PointTuple params k, its cardinality params.q.descFactorial k, and nonemptiness ( 𝑘 ≤ 𝑞 ) into a shared API. 

### Relevant Mathlib definitions and lemmas 

• Equiv.subtypeInjectiveEquivEmbedding (Mathlib/Logic/Embedding/Basic.lean ): equivalence between in‑ jective functions and embeddings. 

• Fintype.card_embedding_eq (Mathlib/Data/Fintype/CardEmbedding.lean ): cardinality formula for embed‑ dings between finite types. 

• Nat.descFactorial_pos (Mathlib/Data/Nat/Factorial/Basic.lean ): gives 0 < 𝑛 𝑘 ↔ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 , establishing nonemptiness directly. 

### Relevant project definitions 

• MIPStarRE.LDT.Pasting.distinctTuples : set of 𝑘 ‑tuples with injective coordinates. 

• MIPStarRE.LDT.Pasting.ldDnoteq : main total‑variation bound TV (uniform , distinct ) ≤ 𝑘 2/𝑞 .

### Suggested approach 

Create a shared support API in Tuples.lean with three declarations: (i) distinctTupleSupport params k: Finset.univ.filter (Function.Injective) as a named definition. (ii) card_distinctTupleSupport : cardinality equals params.q.descFactorial k, proved via subtypeInjec-tiveEquivEmbedding and card_embedding_eq .(iii) distinctTupleSupport_nonempty_iff : nonemptiness equivalent to 𝑘 ≤ 𝑞 , proved via Nat.descFactorial_-pos .

### Gaps to fill 

• No Mathlib gap: all required embedding and factorial lemmas already exist in Mathlib. 

• Project gap only: factoring the repeated local proofs into Tuples.lean .

The Issue Tracker workflow responded to issue completion or reopening and to pull‑request opening or merg‑ ing. At this snapshot, an agent performed both tracking updates and post‑merge follow‑up review when the review switch was enabled. Its prompt required each new proof task to identify the mathematical source, the relevant Lean declarations, and what remained to be proved. It also instructed the agent to inspect de‑ pendencies and recommend an unblocked task, taking account of what that task would enable downstream. These recommendations were posted in issue comments. The post‑merge creation procedure appears in Section E.3; Section E.5 gives an example. Periodic reporting served a separate purpose. The Daily Standup Summary workflow ran on weekdays or on request and asked an agent to summarize proved results, proof strategies, open problems, and dependencies in a dated issue. Its prompt required updating an existing report for that date rather than creating a duplicate. The scheduled Stale issue audit instead produced a report of stale source citations without editing issues. 52 E.5 Pull‑request links and task decomposition 

Pull‑request descriptions explicitly linked code changes to the underlying proof tasks using keyword refer‑ ences. We used Addresses #N when a pull request advanced an intermediate step, and Closes #N when it discharged the target obligation. Merging a pull request with a closing keyword automatically updated the sub‑issue state on GitHub and advanced the parent tracker’s progress. The decomposition of issue #422 (tracking the induction step) illustrates this hierarchical progression (Ta‑ ble S10). When PR #1031 merged, the post‑merge triage opened child issues issue #1037 and issue #1038, attaching both as native sub‑issues under issue #422. Subsequent pull requests advanced or closed these children individually until the final statement correction closed the parent tracker. 

Table S10 | Task decomposition and pull‑request relations in the history of tracker issue #422.                 

> Reference Relation State change
> Issue #1037, issue #1038 Native children of issue #422 Both issues added as children of the tracker. PR #1045 Closes #1038 Merged PR closed the answer‑side bridge task. PR #1218 Addresses #1037 Merged PR advanced the successor‑slice task. PR #1221 Closes #1037 Merged PR closed that child issue. PR #1789 Closes #422 Final statement correction closed the parent tracker.

Native sub‑issues maintained the hierarchical decomposition of mathematical goals into tractable tasks, while pull‑request links recorded the exact code changes that resolved each obligation. 

## E.6 Automated pull‑request repair 

Automated repair loops in GitHub Actions returned compiler diagnostics and review findings directly to proving agents. Because each pull request maintained its target branch, review discussions, and incremen‑ tal commits across separate agent invocations, verification and repair proceeded asynchronously after the initiating session concluded. 

Dispatch from repository events. At the pinned proof snapshot, the Auto Fix (Lean) workflow routed fail‑ ures from continuous integration and code review to specialized repair jobs. A failing Lean Action CI run dispatched build repair; a failing Lint blueprint run dispatched blueprint repair. For mathematical review, a completed run of Claude Code Review (Lean) dispatched review repair if the pull request carried the auto-fix-claude label. This review trigger required the review workflow itself to finish execution, regardless of whether the reviewer approved the change. Label‑triggered dispatch evaluated current repository state: it queried the latest completed checks for the head commit and collected active, unresolved review threads, skipping outdated discussions from earlier commits and avoiding redundant repairs when a subsequent build had already succeeded. Dispatch was restricted to internal branches and could be disabled repository‑ wide. 53 Repair on the pull‑request branch. The dispatcher passed the failed run identifier and log output to the build or blueprint repair agent, or provided the review summary and unresolved comment threads to the review repair agent. Each repair job checked out the pull‑request branch directly. When multiple feed‑ back types triggered concurrently, the workflow serialized execution in a fixed order—build, blueprint, and review—to prevent concurrent push conflicts, while a branch‑level concurrency group cancelled su‑ perseded jobs whenever a newer commit arrived. Repair prompts specified mandatory local verification before pushing: Lean repairs required lake build ,while blueprint repairs required recompiling the blueprint and validating declaration links. The agent pushed directly to the branch with an automated repair marker and summarized its edits in a pull‑request comment. For theorems formalizing results from the paper, standing instructions strictly forbade altering the mathematical statement to bypass proof obligations; if an agent could not establish the declared state‑ ment, it was instructed to document the mathematical blocker rather than weaken assumptions or conclu‑ sions. Routine build and review repairs thus fed directly into the proof‑gap protocol whenever a failure exposed a genuine mathematical discrepancy. 

Continuation and stopping. To prevent runaway iteration, a guard action terminated automation after five consecutive commits bearing automated repair markers (such as [claude-review-fix] ), counting build, blueprint, and review repairs cumulatively. The counter inspected commit trailers backward from 

HEAD and reset whenever an unmarked commit appeared, bounding individual automated sequences rather than lifetime repairs on a branch. To prevent cyclic ping‑pong between reviewer and repair agents, the review workflow skipped evaluation when the latest commit carried a repair marker. A repair job exited immediately without invoking the model if all review threads had already been addressed or if no actionable code changes remained. While agents verified changes locally before pushing, CI workflows independently validated the resulting commits on GitHub before merge. 

Case study: automated review and repair. PR #2340 retargeted blueprint dependencies to theorem for‑ mulations allowing independent Hilbert spaces for Alice and Bob. Automated review on the initial pull request triggered two successive repair cycles. The first repair, commit 8ced55 , reorganized the correspond‑ ing gap note and corrected its mathematical citations. The second, commit 0fdcb4 , replaced an informal table of declaration names with explicit mathematical statements contrasting the single‑space and heteroge‑ neous formulations, and updated downstream references. Both commits carried the [claude-review-fix] 

trailer. A subsequent agent pass verified that all requested revisions were satisfied, concluding the repair sequence without additional commits. The blueprint compilation, blueprint–Lean synchronization, and proof‑debt scanners all passed cleanly on the final commit. This trace illustrates how repository‑triggered loops ingest review comments, apply targeted mathematical corrections to the working branch, and re‑ verify against automated checks without human intervention. 

## E.7 Tool loops, goal mode, and proof‑task completion 

FormalFlow kept a proving session active across model turns by retaining its objective and supplying a con‑ tinuation prompt before the session would otherwise wait for user input. At TeXRA commit 9114c3eb2d (10 June 2026), the objective was a text document stating what to achieve, how to approach it, and what to check before stopping. The plan tool presented the objective for approval. Approving it with goal mode enabled started the session’s automatic continuations. For proof work, the objective identified the mathematical obligation, while the repository instructions below specified how to check the result. When the goal was active and no follow‑up message was waiting, TeXRA prompted the agent to continue, supplying the objective and elapsed time. The continuation prompt began:                    

> Autonomous objective active. Keep working until it is verifiably done. Do not end your turn to summarize progress or hand back control; only stop when the objective's end state is true and you have inspected real evidence for it.

It also instructed the agent not to replace the objective with a smaller or easier task, and to check evidence for every requirement before declaring the task complete. 54 The agent ended the goal through the plan tool’s complete command, which required a reason describing how it had checked the result. The tool removed the active goal entry, which stopped further automatic con‑ tinuations. The completion command logged this report; the proof was checked through Lean commands and comparison with the paper. If execution failed or was cancelled, TeXRA paused the active goal. 

Repository events and progress checks. We used GitHub subscriptions to notify the proving session of changes in the repository. The TeXRA implementation at 9114c3eb2d provided a github_subscription tool for watching a repository, an individual pull request, or an issue. TeXRA polled GitHub through its REST API and sent changes to the subscribing session as follow‑up messages. Pull‑request subscriptions reported comments and reviews from accounts that passed the bot filter, including agents using author accounts. The filter checked GitHub account type and the [bot] login suffix. Subscriptions also reported failed checks and their annotations, changes in merge conflicts, and completed continuous‑integration checks for the latest pull‑request commit. The subscription distinguished completed checks from passing checks for each commit, so a successful rerun could produce a new notification after an earlier failure. A pull‑request subscription ended when the pull request closed or merged. An issue subscription remained active after closure and notified the session if the issue reopened. TeXRA queued these events with user messages and delivered them before the goal reminder. The agent could then respond to repository changes while continuing to work toward the same objective and stopping condition. The orchestrator also called progressCheck at the end of a session. This read‑only agent inspected the objective, subagent results, Git and pull‑request state, and follow‑up tasks that could now proceed. The agent recommended whether to stop, continue with a task, choose among remaining tasks, or ask the user when the objective was unclear. Its report returned to the parent session as a follow‑up message, and the orchestrator then acted on the recommendation. The orchestrator thus checked for remaining work before ending the session. 

Proof‑task checks. At the pinned snapshot, the repository instructions directed agents to read the LIDT paper, then the blueprint, then the Lean code. For a theorem labelled as coming from the paper, agents had to preserve the paper’s hypotheses and conclusion. After each edit, they had to compare the Lean statement with the paper and identify any extra assumptions or changes to the conclusion. Agents first type‑checked the changed Lean file and checked for unfinished proofs. Changes to imports or shared declarations also required a library build. They also reviewed whether the compiled proof estab‑ lished the requested statement. The final‑theorem axiom audit is described in Supplementary Appendix A. The pull‑request conventions in Section E.5 specified how to report partial progress or close a completed task. 

## E.8 Codebase metrics and project timeline 

At completion of the proof, the library contains 126,367 lines of Lean across 337 files. Table S11 summarizes the library metrics and the formalization timeline. 55 Table S11 | Library and formalization metrics at proof completion (24 June 2026). Commit counts include every ancestor reachable from that revision.             

> Measurement Value
> Lines of Lean in the library 126,367 Lean source files in the library 337 Library sorry tokens 0Explicit custom axioms 0Lean / Mathlib version v4.31.0 Formalization timeline 7 March–24 June 2026 Calendar days / active commit days 110 / 83 Commits reachable from the snapshot 2,778 Pull requests merged by 24 June 2026 1,790

We counted commits reachable from the pinned snapshot and active commit days from their author dates. The pull‑request count includes requests merged by 24 June 2026. 

## E.9 Account attribution and agent commit contributions 

We counted commits by author name and by agent names in the Co-Authored-By field, using the history up to commit b39705 . Table S12 separates agent‑named accounts from author accounts and lists author‑ account commits that name an agent as a co‑author. Although git author metadata attributes 2,314 commits (83.3%) to author accounts, all formal Lean code was generated by autonomous language‑model sessions. Interactive agent sessions running locally in developer terminals inherited the host environment’s default git credentials, so commits created during local agent runs were recorded under author accounts in the early days. Later, we explicitly configured bot identifiers for different agent harnesses to the best effort. 

Table S12 | Account names and agent co‑author markers at commit b39705 (24 June 2026). The last row counts author‑account commits that name an agent as co‑author; these commits are also included in the author‑account row. Local agent sessions committed under host author accounts in the early days.      

> Account or marker Commits
> All commits reachable from the snapshot 2,778 Author accounts 2,314 Agent‑named accounts 464 Author‑account commits with agent co‑author trailers 327

We collected author identities and commit messages, grouped aliases of the same author, and identified agent names in the author field and Co-Authored-By trailers. Agent‑named accounts and agent co‑author trailers identify 791 commits (28.5%). But in fact, all of the commits are being carried out by the agents. 56 E.10 Model token usage and accounting 

We measured model token usage across the MIPStarRE repository and the older workspace that enclosed its checkout, which together encompass the low‑degree test formalization and related preparatory devel‑ opments. We combine TeXRA exports, machine checkpoints, native Codex logs, and OpenCode message accounting after removing duplicate histories from forked sessions. The resulting dataset contains 56,089 interactive records. These records account for 30.121 billion tokens: 30.035 billion input tokens and 85.676 million output tokens. Relative to the completed library of 126,367 lines of verified Lean, this corresponds to an overall intensity of approximately 238,000 tokens per line of accepted Lean. The marked asymmetry between input and output tokens reflects the structure of interactive formalization: each turn feeds the en‑ tire file context, Lake compiler diagnostics, and blueprint dependencies back to the model, while the model generates concise tactic scripts or proof repairs. Additional Codex index counters remain separate from this total, as missing session logs prevent deduplicating inherited fork history or resolving overlap with TeXRA exports. Continuous‑integration workflow runs in GitHub Actions from the same period (1 April–4 June 2026) yielded no surviving recoverable token counts. Figure S5 plots TeXRA usage alongside reported dollar values, and Figure S6 presents native Codex and OpenCode separately. The recorded API usage value for TeXRA totaled $10,181.77 USD, whereas OpenCode operated through enterprise API endpoints without per‑call dollar tagging and native Codex ran under fixed subscription seats. Table S13 breaks down input and output by model whenever recorded, placing entries without a recorded model in dedicated categories.    

> 0246
> GPT‑5.4 GPT‑5.5 DeepSeek‑pro Opus 4.6 GPT‑5.6 Sol TeXRA (unresolved) Sonnet 4.6 Opus 4.7 Kimi K3 Codex (unresolved) GPT‑5.4‑mini Opus 4.8 Gemini 3.1 Pro Claude SDK (unresolved) GLM‑4.7 DeepSeek‑flash GPT‑5.2 Opus 5
> gpt54pro
> GPT‑5.6 Terra 7.47B 7.24B 2.17B 1.41B 795.8M 437.4M 434.7M 215.0M 210.5M 160.1M 52.8M 45.1M 16.1M 2.8M 1.6M 843k 382k 339k 191k 158k

Tokens (billions) 20.668 billion tokens   

> 02,000 4,000
> $2,533.83 $5,185.84 $321.76 $1,254.95 $0.00 $164.69 $212.44 $308.55 $97.19 Subscription $8.04 $45.99 $35.62 $0.00 $0.00 $0.05 $3.16 $3.33 $6.35 $0.00

Reported usage value (USD) $10,181.77 reported 

TeXRA 

Figure S5 | Recorded model usage in TeXRA across the MIPStarRE workspaces and the older workspace that enclosed them. Token bars show input plus output; cached input is counted once. TeXRA includes API and subscription routes. Dollar bars show reported usage values, not subscription charges. Model colours match Figure S6. 57 0 100 200 

> GPT‑5.5 GPT‑5.4 248.5M 72.5M

Tokens (millions) 320.994 million tokens 

Native Codex 

Subscription    

> 02,000 4,000 6,000
> GPT‑5.4 GPT‑5.5 GPT‑5.4‑mini
> big-pickle
> GPT‑5.6 Sol 7.22B 1.79B 120.5M 31k 17k

Tokens (millions) 9,132.190 million tokens 

OpenCode 

> 0
> $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00

Reported usage value (USD) $0.00 reported 

Figure S6 | Recorded native model usage in the retained project sessions. Token bars show input plus output; cached input is counted once. OpenCode output includes recorded reasoning tokens. Native Codex was used through a subscription. Identified Codex sessions from TeXRA are excluded. Model colours match Figure S5; token counts here are in millions. Dollar bars show reported usage values. 58 Table S13 | Recorded token usage in the MIPStarRE workspaces and the older workspace that enclosed them, combining retained TeXRA machine exports and recovered native Codex and OpenCode records. Token counts are in millions. Cached input is part of input; share is the fraction of all input and output tokens. 

Model Input Cached input Output Share (%) 

GPT‑5.4 14,721.154 12,713.549 44.090 49.020 GPT‑5.5 9,262.304 8,761.890 20.089 30.817 DeepSeek‑pro 2,162.273 2,143.377 6.847 7.201 Claude Opus 4.6 1,407.632 1,326.941 2.424 4.681 GPT‑5.6 Sol 793.349 705.352 2.481 2.642 TeXRA (model unrecorded) 436.082 416.408 1.324 1.452 Claude Sonnet 4.6 432.370 420.189 2.351 1.443 Claude Opus 4.7 214.177 182.612 0.798 0.714 Kimi K3 208.834 204.026 1.706 0.699 GPT‑5.4‑mini 171.567 155.870 1.667 0.575 Codex (model unrecorded) 159.255 151.258 0.803 0.531 Claude Opus 4.8 44.753 43.214 0.393 0.150 Gemini 3.1 Pro 15.710 13.613 0.366 0.053 Claude SDK (model unrecorded) 2.723 2.519 0.044 0.009 GLM‑4.7 1.579 1.512 0.013 0.005 DeepSeek‑flash 0.837 0.751 0.005 0.003 GPT‑5.2 0.237 0.076 0.145 0.001 Claude Opus 5 0.274 0.000 0.065 0.001  

> gpt54pro

0.189 0.000 0.003 0.001 GPT‑5.6 Terra 0.094 0.014 0.064 0.001  

> big-pickle

0.031 0.015 0.000 0.000 Total 30,035.425 27,243.188 85.676 100.000 

59 Apr 01 May 01 May 22 

> 010 20

UTC date (2026) Cumulative tokens (billions)     

> Anthropic OpenAI DeepSeek Google Other

Figure S7 | Recorded usage during formalization. Calls are selected through 4 June 2026, as in the proof‑ status figure. Retained call dates cover 1 April to 22 May 2026. The bands accumulate 22.56 billion input and output tokens from 54,916 records, assigned to an explicit call or message creation timestamp of each call (UTC). A further 6.49 billion recorded tokens have no retained call date and are omitted; calls dated outside the formalization period are also excluded. 60 0 2 4 6 8 10 

lean leanOrchestrator build orchestrator codex Sisyphus - Ultraworker leanSimplifier Sisyphus-Junior leanBlueprint leanSearch unrecorded general explore oracle Codex Desktop plan librarian search review progressCheck Codex CLI fixer Metis - Plan Consultant research explorer ask presenter code-review-lean compaction generic criticize claude polish latexFixer council chat Hephaestus - Deep Agent assistant apply Atlas - Plan Executor setup Momus - Plan Critic designer 16k 18k 42k 109k 346k 456k 872k 1.0M 1.3M 1.9M 2.2M 4.4M 6.3M 7.0M 9.9M 11.8M 15.0M 18.9M 24.0M 29.2M 29.5M 30.7M 37.0M 42.5M 68.2M 89.6M 93.6M 128.1M 284.0M 345.8M 374.8M 403.0M 437.4M 519.4M 675.2M 724.7M 767.2M 2.19B 2.27B 3.57B 4.10B 4.25B 8.56B 

Tokens (billions) 

GPT‑5.4 GPT‑5.5 GPT‑5.2 GPT‑5.4‑mini Opus 4.8 Opus 4.7 Opus 4.6 Sonnet 4.6 DeepSeek‑pro DeepSeek‑flash Gemini 3.1 Pro Codex (unresolved) Claude SDK (unresolved) TeXRA (unresolved) GPT‑5.6 Sol GPT‑5.6 Terra Opus 5 Haiku 4.5 Kimi K3 GLM‑4.7 gpt54pro big-pickle 

0 2,000 4,000 

$0.00 $0.00 $0.09 $0.00 $4.59 $0.00 $0.00 $1.13 $0.00 $2.41 $1.27 $0.00 $27.75 $12.48 $0.00 $0.00 $3.94 $16.94 $0.00 $13.92 $0.00 $0.00 Subscription $18.26 $7.20 $22.92 $0.00 $0.00 Subscription $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $164.69 $306.54 $750.93 $0.00 $305.44 $0.00 $0.00 (Subscription) †

$1,942.78 $0.00 $2,413.24 $4,165.25 

Reported usage value (USD) 

Figure S8 | Recorded token usage and dollar amounts by agent and model. Aligned rows merge verified agent aliases and retain harness origins. The left panel stacks input plus output tokens by model; the right panel stacks reported usage values using the same colours. Native Codex and Claude Code use subscriptions. Reported values are not subscription charges; a dagger marks records without a reported value. 61 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> DeepSeek‑pro Kimi K3 GPT‑5.5 / SDK GPT‑5.4 / Native Sonnet 4.6 GPT‑5.5 / Native GPT‑5.4‑mini / Other Opus 4.8 GLM‑4.7 GPT‑5.5 / Other TeXRA (unresolved) Codex (unresolved) GPT‑5.4 / Other GPT‑5.4 / OpenCode Opus 4.6 Claude SDK (unresolved) GPT‑5.5 / OpenCode DeepSeek‑flash GPT‑5.6 Sol / Other GPT‑5.4‑mini / OpenCode Gemini 3.1 Pro Opus 4.7
> big-pickle
> GPT‑5.2 GPT‑5.4 / SDK GPT‑5.6 Terra Opus 5
> gpt54pro
> GPT‑5.6 Sol / OpenCode 99.1% 97.7% 97.6% 97.4% 97.2% 96.8% 96.8% 96.6% 95.8% 95.5% 95.5% 95.0% 94.5% 94.5% 94.3% 92.5% 90.1% 89.7% 88.9% 88.2% 86.7% 85.3% 49.5% 32.1% 21.3% 15.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%

Recorded cache‑read share of input (%) 

Figure S9 | Prompt caching in the combined workspace records. Each rate is the sum of recorded cache‑read tokens divided by the sum of input tokens for that model and route. We separate recorded routes when a model appears in multiple harnesses, including OpenCode. These labels identify the route, not an additional model. Colours match Figure S5. Figure S7 charts the chronology of calls with recoverable dates between 7 March and 4 June 2026, grouped by model provider. These retained dates do not span the entire interval, and the workspace totals also include undated records as well as activity outside this window. Figure S8 groups token volumes and reported usage values by agent identifier and native client. Across all providers, prompt caching served 90.7% of total input tokens. Figure S9 compares these cache‑read proportions across models and execution routes, weighting each entry by input volume. 62 F The review dataset 

## F.1 Population 

The review dataset classified in the main text consists of the GitHub comments and review reports left on pull requests and issues in the MIPStarRE repository. We retrieved them via the GitHub REST API on 27 July 2026: review reports across all 1,904 closed pull requests, alongside repository‑wide listings of inline comments, issue discussions, and pull‑request threads. The 1,904 closed pull requests span numbers 1 to 2,615 (opened between 20 March and 17 July 2026, with 1,816 merged); every pull request carrying discussion comments belongs to this set. Each entry entered the inventory under an identifier combining its type in Table S14 with its GitHub ID, preserving its body text, author, account category, timestamp, and target thread. Inline comments are split into root comments and replies. In addition, 1,089 review reports recorded a submission state, all “commented”, without comment body text. These entries count in the population inventory and in the classified totals; because they carry no comment text, we report below the effect of routing all of them to repository process. 

Table S14 | The 21,651 review comments and reports retrieved on 27 July 2026, by type and by the account type that GitHub assigns to the author.                      

> Record type Count Bot accounts User accounts
> Review reports 7,656 6,859 797 Inline review comments, roots 6,426 6,426 0Inline review comments, replies 790 8782 Pull‑request discussion comments 2,675 1,208 1,467 Issue comments outside pull requests 4,104 2,531 1,573 Total 21,651 17,032 4,619

Each review action is counted individually: an underlying mathematical issue typically spans an initial root comment, replies, change requests, and a subsequent approval. Automated review agents, posting under dedicated bot identities, opened all 6,426 inline root comments: Claude Code, GitHub Copilot, Cursor Bug‑ bot, and the Codex connector. The 782 inline replies under user accounts reflect automated proving and repair agents operating through personal developer credentials (Section E.9); human authors wrote no Lean code throughout the project, providing only high‑level steering and occasional review comments. 

## F.2 Reading and classification 

Classification proceeded in two stages: an open‑ended reading pass with GPT‑5.4, followed by a determinis‑ tic term‑matching classifier. Because the Lean compiler verifies type correctness but cannot judge whether definitions and theorems match the intended mathematics of the paper, review focused heavily on checking formal declarations and intermediate arguments against the published proof. The 21,651 comments and re‑ ports were grouped chronologically by pull request or issue into 2,733 reading units of at most 20 comments, allowing the model to evaluate replies, root comments, and review reports in their conversational context. For each comment or report, the model returned a summary of the claim, a descriptive mechanism label and definition, and categorical ratings for signal class, defect support, severity, follow‑up status, and the‑ matic relevance. To ensure every summary was grounded directly in the comments, the prompt required exact reading receipts consisting of verbatim substrings extracted from the comment text and from any sup‑ porting resolution. An automated harness validated every response against the inputs, retrying generations that omitted comments, produced invalid labels, or failed exact‑substring checks, yielding 15,773 distinct validated mechanism labels in the archived dataset. 63 We then grouped these labels into the three primary categories and nine subcategories of the main‑text table using a deterministic classifier. The script scores normalized text across the model’s structured outputs against curated term lists for each subcategory, isolating technical claims from conversational phrasing. Each entry is assigned to the subcategory with the highest match count, breaking ties in favor of the first‑ listed subcategory in the taxonomy; 117 entries without domain matches defaulted to repository process. The versioned classification script reproduces all twelve counts of the main‑text table exactly. Mathematics and agreement with the paper remains the largest category across all classification variations. Top‑score ties occurred across categories in 2,574 instances. Under the default taxonomy ordering, math‑ ematical alignment receives 55.2%. Reversing the tie‑breaking priority yields 45.2%, and excluding cross‑ category ties yields 51.3%. Routing all 1,089 textless reviews to process gives 52.2%. An independent pilot study on the inline root comments tested the taxonomy against other model families: GPT‑5.6 Terra and Sol classified the comments with context, and Claude Opus 4.8 adjudicated disagreements. When projected onto our three categories, the pilot agreed with the term classifier on 62.7% of the mapped roots (4,023 of 6,412). The pilot assigned 37.2% of roots to mathematical alignment versus 57.0% from the keyword classifier, reflecting the broader keyword coverage used in the script. Follow‑up labels mark the immediate response visible within the discussion thread. Across the entire pop‑ ulation, 3,953 findings identified a concrete defect or plausible risk claim. Of these, 713 (18.0% of defect claims, but only 3.3% of the total 21,651 review events) prompted an observed code change in the same dis‑ cussion thread. A further 3,038 findings (76.9% of defect claims) were accepted without an observed change, deferred, or left without a reply; most other comments were routine bookkeeping or positive confirmations. 

## F.3 Examples of review findings 

Table S15, Table S16, and Table S17 give one to three findings for each subcategory of the main‑text table, each from a comment or report in the review dataset that the reading pass labelled a confirmed defect with an observed change and the classifier placed in the subcategory shown. For each finding, the first line states the form the paper, the blueprint, or the interface requires, the second the form the reviewed draft had, and the third the form after the repair; where a formula or code fragment is shown, the defect is marked with defect highlighting and the repair with repair highlighting . 64 Table S15 | Review findings under “Mathematics and agreement with the paper”. Paper: the required form; Draft: the reviewed form; Repair: the merged form. 

Subcategory Finding 

Mathematical content Paper (Prop. 4.9, 𝐴 and 𝐵 projective): sdd (𝜓; 𝐴, 𝐵) = 2 cons (𝜓; 𝐴, 𝐵) , so ≈2𝛿 ⇔≃ 𝛿 .Draft: cons ≤ sdd , although the same calculation had established the equality, giving only 

≈𝛿 ⇒≃ 𝛿 and doubling the error at every use. Repair: 2 cons = sdd and the implication restated as ≈2𝛿 ⇒≃ 𝛿 (PR #515). Mathematical content Paper (commutativity of points): 𝐴 𝑢 𝑎 ⊗ 𝐼 ≃ 𝛾𝑚 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐿 ℓ[𝑓(𝑢)=𝑎] on average over a uniformly random point 𝑢 and a uniformly random line ℓ through it. Draft: the question distribution was 𝒟 = 𝛿 (ℓ 0,𝑡 0) , a point mass on one default question, so the averaged relation constrained a single (ℓ, 𝑡) and a strategy failing almost everywhere still satisfied the bound. Repair: 𝒟 = Unif (ℒ × 𝔽 𝑞 ) , and Unif (ℒ × 𝔽 2𝑞 ) for the two‑point relation, with the line set ℒ

finite through ℓ ↦ ( base , direction ) (PR #121). Mathematical content Paper (local variance of points): six steps with errors 2𝛿, 2𝜀, 𝑚𝑑 𝑞 , 𝑚𝑑 𝑞 , 2𝜀, 2𝛿 and the 𝑘 ‑step triangle inequality give ≈6(4𝜀+4𝛿+2𝑚𝑑/𝑞) , relaxed to 24(𝜀 + 𝛿 + 𝑚𝑑 𝑞 ).Draft obligation: ≤ 4𝜀 + 4𝛿 + 2 𝑚𝑑 𝑞 , the factor 𝑘 = 6 dropped, six times stronger than the chain proves. Repair: ≤ 6 (4𝜀 + 4𝛿 + 2 𝑚𝑑 𝑞 ) , with 6(⋯) ≤ 24(𝜀 + 𝛿 + 𝑚𝑑 𝑞 ) as a separate lemma (PR #780). Source and blueprint correspondence Blueprint (pasted sum to a polynomial in 𝐺 ): for a bipartite state 𝜓 bi ,

𝔼 𝑥 ∑|𝜏|≥𝑑+1 ∑𝑔 ⟨𝜓 bi | ˆ 𝐻 𝑥 𝑔 ⊗ 𝐼|𝜓 bi ⟩ ≈ 𝜈 8 ∑𝑘 𝑟=𝑑+1 (𝑘 𝑟 )⟨𝜓 bi |𝐺 𝑟 (𝐼 − 𝐺) 𝑘−𝑟 ⊗ 𝐼|𝜓 bi ⟩.Draft: a free state parameter with the added premise 𝜓 bi = 𝜓 , absent from the blueprint and never used in the proof. Repair: parameter and premise removed ; the lemma is stated at the strategy’s state 𝜓 , the identification the paper makes (PR #446). Source and blueprint correspondence Paper (cascade bound): 𝜈 ≤ 10000 𝑘 2𝑚 2(𝜀 1/1024 + (𝑑/𝑞) 1/1024 ) ⇒ 𝜎 ≤ 10000 𝑘 2𝑚 4𝐸 .Draft blueprint, tagged complete: 0 ≤ 𝜈 ∧ 𝜈 ≤ 1000 𝑘 2𝑚 2(…) , a conjunct Lean never assumes and a coefficient ten times too small. Repair: 𝜈 ≤ 10000 𝑘 2𝑚 2(…) , matching Lean symbol for symbol (PR #507). Semantic and API invariants Paper: a sub‑measurement is {𝐴 𝑎 } with 𝐴 𝑎 ⪰ 0 and ∑𝑎 𝐴 𝑎 = 𝑇 ⪯ 𝐼 .Draft: the three invariants became structure fields with default proofs left unproved , so any caller obtained them for free. Repair: no defaults ; every construction site proves 𝐴 𝑎 ⪰ 0 , ∑𝑎 𝐴 𝑎 = 𝑇 , and 𝑇 ⪯ 𝐼 (PR #124). 

65 Table S16 | Review findings under “Exposition and library design”. 

Subcategory Finding 

Mathematical exposition Interface (base case 𝑚 = 1 ): the distinguished outcomes are the zero polynomial, 

𝑎 𝐴 = 𝑎 𝐵 = 0 .Draft: the docstring said so; the code took 

Classical.choice (inferInstance: Nonempty _) , an arbitrary element not provably equal to 0.Repair: 𝑎 𝐴 = 𝑎 𝐵 = 0 built explicitly, with the proof deg 𝑥 𝑖 0 ≤ 𝑑 (PR #1044). Mathematical exposition Definition: normalization is 𝜏(𝜌) = 1 for the density operator 𝜌 under the normalized trace, with no purity assumption. Draft docstring: ⟨𝜓|𝜓⟩ = 1 , “as is standard for pure strategies”. Repair: 𝜏(𝜌) = 1 , coinciding with ⟨𝜓|𝜓⟩ = 1 for pure states; the corrected reading gave 

𝜏(𝜌) = 1 ⇒ dim ℋ ≥ 1 and removed a redundant instance argument (PR #443). Library architecture and API Blueprint: the public successor‑step wrapper returns 𝐺 ∈ PolyMeas (𝑚 + 1, 𝑞, 𝑑) “without exposing the intermediate bookkeeping packages”. Draft: its hypotheses mentioned a private helper for the restriction package ℛ five times, a name no caller outside the module can write. Repair: ℛ ∶= ofRestrictedProbabilities (…) bound locally inside each hypothesis (PR #649). Library architecture and API Paper (restricted probabilities): 𝔼 𝑥 [ 𝑚 𝑚+1 𝜀 𝑥 ] ≤ 𝜀 and 𝔼 𝑥 [ 𝑚 𝑚+1 𝛾 𝑥 ] ≤ 𝛾 , one transverse weight for both branches. Draft: 𝔼 𝑥 [𝑤 diag 𝛾 𝑥 ] ≤ 𝛾 with 𝑤 diag deleted earlier and undefined, so the module did not elaborate. Repair: 𝔼 𝑥 [ 𝑚 𝑚+1 𝛾 𝑥 ] ≤ 𝛾 (PR #660). Reuse and maintainability The review certified the six‑step chain and 6(4𝜀 + 4𝛿 + 2 𝑚𝑑 𝑞 ) ≤ 24(𝜀 + 𝛿 + 𝑚𝑑 𝑞 ) against the paper. Draft: the line‑chart identity ℓ𝑢,𝑖,𝑡 0 (𝑡) = 𝑢[𝑖 ↦ (𝑢 𝑖 − 𝑡 0) + 𝑡] was proved twice, once as a helper nothing called and once inline. Repair: helper deleted , the identity stated once (PR #898). Reuse and maintainability The final stage needs √100𝑚 ≤ 10𝑚 , √10𝑚 ≤ 4𝑚 , √400𝑚 ≤ 20𝑚 , and √960𝑚 ≤ 31𝑚 for 𝑚 ≥ 1 .Draft: the four bounds were private and unused in the helper module and re‑proved verbatim in the module that needed them. Repair: public, stated once , the duplicates deleted (PR #1295). 

66 Table S17 | Review findings under “Audit and execution infrastructure”. 

Subcategory Finding 

Build, CI and review automation Invariant: review runs skip commits produced by automation prefixes (Claude and Codex, automatic and review‑driven). Draft guard: ^\[claude-(auto|review)-fix\] , allowing Codex prefixes to escape and re‑trigger review loops. Repair: ^\[(claude|codex)-(auto|review)-fix\] (PR #1392). Build, CI and review automation Coverage test: required scripts in workflow 𝑤 must be included in path filters for each trigger 

𝑒 .Draft: evaluated path filters across the union of all YAML blocks, masking missing triggers. Repair: enforced path filter coverage independently for each trigger block (PR #960). Reproducibility, security and environment The documented per‑file check must terminate. Draft: one simplification step with 22 arguments made the file’s check exceed 120 s and caused the CI build to time out. Repair: reverted the step to an explicit tracked obligation naming the missing reindexing, allowing the build to pass (PR #662). Reproducibility, security and environment Toolchain pin audit: ensure toolchain version strings match between README and lakefile. Draft: string mismatch between ‘4.28.0’ and ‘v4.28.0’. Repair: normalized version strings on both sides before comparison (PR #762). Repository process and evidence Idempotent notices: automated merge notices include a deduplication marker to prevent re‑posting upon webhook redelivery. Draft: notice body inserted text inside the marker, causing re‑posting on redelivered merge events. Repair: moved deduplication marker to a strict body prefix, plus a regression test (PR #2595). 

67 G Prompt for auditing and repairing the formalization 

During major repair phases, when accumulated conditional wrappers and stand‑in structures obscured the remaining mathematical debt, we the human deployed a comprehensive audit‑and‑repair prompt across the repository. The prompt instructs agents to audit theorem declarations against the published paper and interactive blueprint, classify every discrepancy, and either restore source‑faithful statements with tracked obligations or extract useful intermediate lemmas. We apply this prompt once in the goal mode to the repository, where after each natural end turn of the agent, another progress check agent is launched to check the progress of the repair, and then prompt the main agent to continue the repair. The complete audit and repair instruction follows. 

Audit and repair prompt 

Audit and repair the LDT formalization so that paper-facing Lean and blueprint statements match the source paper, and so that remaining red or unfinished dependency-graph nodes are classified by their real mathematical status. Work in ~/Local/agentFormalization/MIPStarRE. The source of truth is references/ldt-paper/, then blueprint/src/, then MIPStarRE/. Also check the GitHub Pages branch in a separate worktree and inspect the generated blueprint dependency graph, including dep_graph_document.html, so that the audit reflects the public non-green nodes. This is not a renaming task. Mechanical renames of Bridge, Package, Residual, Repair, Producer, Input, or Hypotheses do not solve the problem. The task is to determine what mathematical assertion is missing or incorrectly represented, and then either prove it, state it faithfully with a tracked sorry, or remove the misleading paper-facing link. Main invariants: 1. A theorem, lemma, or proposition advertised as a paper result must match the cited statement in references/ldt-paper/ up to faithful formal encoding. Do not add a bridge, residual, repair, package, producer, input, generic hypotheses bundle, or arbitrary implication hypothesis to make the theorem compile. 2. If a proof step is missing, keep the paper-facing theorem visible and source-faithful. It may contain a tracked sorry during paper-realignment mode. The missing step should become a named proof obligation or construction theorem, not an extra assumption on the paper theorem. 3. Conditional helpers may remain only when they preserve useful mathematics. They must have names and docstrings that say they are internal obligations, not source hypotheses. They must not be linked by \leanok to the source-labelled blueprint theorem. 4. Some boundary hypotheses may be faithful formal encodings: positivity needed for division, nonemptiness, decidability, field-model instances, or finite-type structure. These must be distinguished from load-bearing invented proof assumptions. 5. Prefer larger useful repair batches. Each PR should discharge several related audit items when possible, but avoid unrelated refactoring. Audit procedure: A. Inspect the public dependency graph from the GitHub Pages branch and list the non-green or missing nodes. For each node, compare: - the paper statement in references/ldt-paper/; - the blueprint statement and its \lean{} / \leanok status; - the Lean declaration, if any; - whether the Lean proof contains sorry, axiom, or proof-evasion scaffolding; 

68 - whether the Lean statement has extra hypotheses or a weakened conclusion. B. Scan the Lean and blueprint sources for proof-debt vocabulary and conditional scaffolding: Bridge, bridge, Residual, residual, Repair, repair, Package, package, Producer, producer, Input, input, Hypotheses, hypotheses, Assumptions, assumptions, sorryAx, obstruction, conditional, ofBridge, ofObligations. Classification for every item: - Missing statement: no Lean declaration yet corresponds to the paper statement. - Stated with proof hole: Lean declaration is source-faithful but contains sorry. - Unlinked statement: Lean declaration exists and is faithful, but the blueprint does not point to it. - Unfaithful statement: Lean declaration has extra non-paper hypotheses, changed quantifiers, weakened conclusions, or packaged conclusions. - Conditional helper: useful internal theorem, but not the paper theorem. - Boundary condition: extra Lean hypothesis appears mathematically necessary for a faithful formal encoding. - Obsolete scaffolding: conditional object has no mathematical value and should be removed or replaced by a sorry in the source-faithful theorem. Repair policy: 1. First recover actual mathematics from existing scaffolding. If a bridge or package contains a real construction or inequality, extract a self-contained theorem stated from paper hypotheses. 2. If the scaffold merely assumes the missing step, do not preserve it as a paper theorem. Restore the paper-aligned statement and leave the missing proof as a tracked sorry or named obligation. 3. Update the blueprint only when the Lean statement is faithful. Remove or avoid \leanok for conditional helpers. 4. Add concise docstrings for proof obligations explaining the paper label, the missing mathematical step, and the intended discharge. 5. Update tracking issues. Use native GitHub subissues to connect the main bridge-debt tracking issue to specific repair tasks. One PR may address multiple subissues. 6. Treat statement drift and definition drift as high priority, because incorrect definitions propagate through downstream theorems. 7. Assign yourself when you do it Deliverables: - A table or issue comment classifying the non-green dependency graph nodes and remaining sorry sites by mathematical status. - One or more PRs that make real mathematical progress: source-faithful statements restored, useful obligations proved or isolated, misleading conditional paper links removed, and local checks improved where cheap. - For each PR, include a statement integrity audit: paper assumptions, Lean assumptions, paper conclusion, Lean conclusion, verdict. - Validation commands in the PR body. Prefer local single-file checks first; run lake build only when the batch touches shared declarations. 

69 H Tools distilled for new formalizations 

FormalFlow evolved as we carried out the formalization. Proof attempts and mathematical review exposed missing obligations and recurring discrepancies, which led us to revise the project instructions, review procedures, and automated checks. We distilled reusable parts of this work into a project template and supporting tools for new formalizations.These tools bring together the preparation of a Lean project, the correspondence between mathematical statements and formal declarations, and the instructions followed in proving sessions. The preceding appendices record how the system developed in the LIDT formalization; here we describe what a new project can reuse. 

Preparing the project. oh-my-formalization collects the initial project structure in a template: a Lean package with a pinned Mathlib dependency, a blueprint, paper‑gap notes, and automated builds. The blueprint links mathematical statements to Lean declarations and records their dependencies. The tem‑ plate also includes procedures for publishing the blueprint and gap notes, so that the mathematics and its corrections can be read alongside the formal development. lean-env-action provides the common Lean environment for the automated checks, including retrieval of compiled Mathlib dependencies. The project then runs lake build and its own verification commands. A new formalization supplies the paper, defini‑ tions, and target statements in place of the template’s sample mathematics. 

Maintaining the mathematical account. texra-blueprint collects shared tools for rendering the blueprint and recording departures from the paper. It supports declaration links, dependency references, and bibliographies, with checks for specified rendering errors. Its paper‑gap notes preserve the cited assertion, the mathematical point at issue, and the proposed correction, together with the status of the decision. Checks require registered source identifiers and reject references to missing notes; the notes are published as individual PDFs with a common index. This makes the proof‑gap protocol available from the beginning of a project: when a proof requires an additional hypothesis or a changed bound, the mathematical change has an explicit record for subsequent review. 

Carrying the procedures across sessions. texra-lean-skills collects reusable instructions for agents working on Lean proofs. They cover searching the existing library, developing proofs, maintaining the blueprint, recording gaps, and simplifying proofs without changing their statements. Shared conventions also specify documentation and review requirements. The project supplies the mathematical context and open obligations, while these instructions give successive sessions a common procedure for addressing them. As in the LIDT formalization, further proof attempts and review can lead to revisions of that proce‑ dure. Together, these tools provide a starting point for applying FormalFlow to a new mathematical problem. The target theorem and its dependencies determine the proof tasks; the blueprint and gap notes retain the math‑ ematical account as those tasks are resolved. The review and repeated audit described in Methods and Supplementary Appendix G check the resulting development against the intended statements. 70 References 

[1] Georges Gonthier. Formal proof—the four‑color theorem. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. , 55(11):1382–1393, 2008. [2] Georges Gonthier, Andrea Asperti, Jeremy Avigad, Yves Bertot, Cyril Cohen, François Garillot, Stéphane Le Roux, Assia Mahboubi, Russell O’Connor, Sidi Ould Biha, Ioana Pasca, Laurence Rideau, Alexey Solovyev, Enrico Tassi, and Laurent Théry. A machine‑checked proof of the odd order theorem. In ITP , pages 163–179, 2013. [3] Thomas Hales, Mark Adams, Gertrud Bauer, Tat Dat Dang, John Harrison, Le Truong Hoang, Cezary Kaliszyk, Victor Magron, Sean McLaughlin, Tat Thang Nguyen, Quang Truong Nguyen, Tobias Nipkow, Steven Obua, Joseph Pleso, Jason Rute, Alexey Solovyev, Thi Hoai An Ta, Nam Trung Tran, Thi Diep Trieu, Josef Urban, Ky Vu, and Roland Zumkeller. A formal proof of the Kepler conjecture. Forum Math. Pi , 5:e2, 2017. [4] Johan Commelin and Adam Topaz. Abstraction boundaries and spec driven development in pure mathematics. 

Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. , 61(2):241–255, 2024. [5] Kevin Buzzard and Richard Taylor. Towards a Lean proof of Fermat’s last theorem. https://imperialcollegelo ndon.github.io/FLT/ , 2024. Project website. [6] Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving. arXiv:2009.03393 [cs.LG], 2020. [7] Guillaume Lample, Timothée Lacroix, Marie‑Anne Lachaux, Aurélien Rodriguez, Amaury Hayat, Thibaut Lavril, Gabriel Ebner, and Xavier Martinet. HyperTree proof search for neural theorem proving. In NeurIPS , 2022. [8] Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu. miniF2F: A cross‑system benchmark for formal olympiad‑ level mathematics. In ICLR , 2022. [9] Yuhuai Wu, Albert Q. Jiang, Wenda Li, Markus N. Rabe, Charles Staats, Mateja Jamnik, and Christian Szegedy. Autoformalization with large language models. In NeurIPS , pages 32353–32368, 2022. [10] Trieu H. Trinh, Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V. Le, He He, and Thang Luong. Solving olympiad geometry without human demonstrations. Nature , 625(7995):476–482, 2024. [11] Z. Z. Ren, Zhihong Shao, Junxiao Song, Huajian Xin, Haocheng Wang, Wanjia Zhao, Liyue Zhang, Zhe Fu, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Shirong Ma, Hongxuan Tang, Yuxuan Liu, Wenjun Gao, Daya Guo, and Chong Ruan. DeepSeek‑Prover‑V2: Advancing formal mathematical reasoning via reinforcement learning for sub‑ goal decomposition. arXiv:2504.21801 [cs.CL], 2025. [12] Thomas Hubert, Rishi Mehta, Laurent Sartran, Miklós Z. Horváth, Goran Žužić, Eric Wieser, Aja Huang, Julian Schrittwieser, Yannick Schroecker, Hussain Masoom, Ottavia Bertolli, Tom Zahavy, Amol Mandhane, Jessica Yung, Iuliya Beloshapka, Borja Ibarz, Vivek Veeriah, Lei Yu, Oliver Nash, Paul Lezeau, Salvatore Mercuri, Calle Sönne, Bhavik Mehta, Alex Davies, Daniel Zheng, Fabian Pedregosa, Yin Li, Ingrid von Glehn, Mark Rowland, Samuel Albanie, Ameya Velingker, Simon Schmitt, Edward Lockhart, Edward Hughes, Henryk Michalewski, Nicolas Son‑ nerat, Demis Hassabis, Pushmeet Kohli, and David Silver. Olympiad‑level formal mathematical reasoning with reinforcement learning. Nature , 651(8106):607–613, 2026. [13] Ahmad Rammal, Niket Patel, Fabian Gloeckle, Amaury Hayat, Julia Kempe, Remi Munos, Charles Arnal, and Vivien Cabannes. Formalizing mathematics at scale. arXiv:2605.29955 [cs.AI], 2026. [14] George Tsoukalas, Anton Kovsharov, Sergey Shirobokov, Anja Surina, Moritz Firsching, Gergely Bérczi, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Arun Suggala, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Eric Wieser, Lei Yu, Aja Huang, Miklós Z. Horváth, Andrew Ferraiuolo, Henryk Michalewski, Edward Lockhart, Codrut Grosu, Thomas Hubert, Matej Balog, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Advancing mathematics research with AI‑driven formal proof search. arXiv:2605.22763 [cs.AI], 2026. [15] OpenAI. Ten advances in mathematics and theoretical computer science. https://openai.com/index/ten-adva nces-in-mathematics/ , 2026. Online report. [16] Yuanhe Zhang, Yuekai Sun, Taiji Suzuki, Jason D. Lee, and Fanghui Liu. LeanMarathon: Toward reliable AI co‑ mathematicians through long‑horizon Lean autoformalization. arXiv:2606.05400 [cs.AI], 2026. [17] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R. Narasimhan. SWE‑bench: Can language models resolve real‑world GitHub issues? In ICLR , 2024. 

71 [18] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE‑agent: Agent‑computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In NeurIPS , pages 50528–50652, 2024. [19] Patrick Massot. leanblueprint: A plasTeX plugin to build formalization blueprints. https://github.com/Patrick Massot/leanblueprint , 2020. GitHub repository. [20] Zhengfeng Ji, Anand Natarajan, Thomas Vidick, John Wright, and Henry Yuen. MIP * = RE. arXiv:2001.04383 [quant‑ ph], 2020. [21] Alain Connes. Classification of injective factors. Cases 𝐼𝐼 1, 𝐼𝐼 ∞, 𝐼𝐼𝐼 𝜆 , 𝜆 ≠ 1 . Ann. Math. , 104(1):73–115, 1976. [22] Zhengfeng Ji, Anand Natarajan, Thomas Vidick, John Wright, and Henry Yuen. Quantum soundness of the classical low individual degree test. arXiv:2009.12982 [quant‑ph], 2020. [23] Thomas Vidick. Three‑player entangled XOR games are NP‑hard to approximate. SIAM J. Comput. , 45(3):1007–1063, 2016. [24] Anand Natarajan and Thomas Vidick. Two‑player entangled games are NP‑hard. In CCC , pages 20:1–20:18, 2018. Withdrawn due to an error inherited from arXiv:1302.1242. [25] Anand Natarajan and Thomas Vidick. Low‑degree testing for quantum states, and a quantum entangled games PCP for QMA. In FOCS , pages 731–742, 2018. [26] Anand Natarajan and John Wright. NEEXP is contained in MIP *. In FOCS , pages 510–518, 2019. [27] Thomas Vidick. It happens to everyone...but it’s not fun. https://mycqstate.wordpress.com/2020/09/29/it-happens-to-everyonebut-its-not-fun/ , 2020. Blog post. [28] Binghai Wang, Chenlong Zhang, Dayiheng Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Jiawei Chen, Mingze Li, Mouxiang Chen, Rongyao Fang, Siyuan Zhang, Xuwu Wang, Yuheng Jing, Zeyao Ma, and Zeyu Cui. The verification horizon: no silver bullet for coding agent rewards. arXiv:2606.26300, 2026. [29] Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Concrete problems in AI safety. arXiv:1606.06565 [cs.AI], 2016. [30] Boris Alexeev. Erdos90: Formal Lean proof of OpenAI’s 2026 counterexample to the Erdős unit distance conjecture. 

> https://github.com/plby/Erdos90

, 2026. GitHub repository. [31] Sirui Lu, Erickson Tjoa, and J. Ignacio Cirac. Multi‑agent autoformalization of tensor network theory. arXiv:2607.07857 [quant‑ph], 2026. [32] Leonardo de Moura, Soonho Kong, Jeremy Avigad, Floris van Doorn, and Jakob von Raumer. The Lean theorem prover (system description). In CADE , pages 378–388, 2015. [33] The mathlib Community. The Lean mathematical library. In CPP , pages 367–381, 2020. [34] Ran Raz and Shmuel Safra. A sub‑constant error‑probability low‑degree test, and a sub‑constant error‑probability PCP characterization of NP. In STOC , pages 475–484, 1997. [35] Alexander Polishchuk and Daniel A. Spielman. Nearly‑linear size holographic proofs. In STOC , pages 194–203, 1994. [36] Leonardo de Moura and Sebastian Ullrich. The Lean 4 theorem prover and programming language. In CADE , pages 625–635, 2021. 

72