Title: Verification of Configurable SRA Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.21385v2

Published Time: Wed, 27 May 2026 00:47:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 

Alessandro Cimatti 1, Alberto Griggio 1, Christian Lidstr¨ om 1,Gianluca Redondi 1, and Dylan Trenti 1,2 

> 1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy 

{cimatti,griggio,clidstrom,gredondi,dtrenti }@fbk.eu  

> 2

University of Udine, Italy trenti.dylan@spes.uniud.it 

Abstract. Many digital systems are designed as collections of asyn-chronous processes orchestrated by a domain-specific scheduler. The ver-ification of such scheduler-restricted asynchronous systems (SRA) is chal-lenging due to process-process and process-scheduler interactions. In this paper, we tackle the problem of verifying configurable SRA. A config-urable SRA describes an unbounded family of possible SRA, each re-sulting from an instantiation satisfying given configuration constraints; our goal is proving at once that every legal instantiation of a config-urable SRA is correct. We propose a contract-based, deductive verifi-cation approach that combines (i) compositional proof rules that ab-stract the scheduler to prove top-level invariant properties, (ii) automatic summarizations of the methods invoked by the scheduler, (iii) simplifi-cation with respect to the nature of the space of configurations. The approach is grounded in (object-oriented) first order logic, requires rea-soning over quantified statements, and leverages the Dafny software ver-ifier as a backend. An experimental evaluation on industrial case studies demonstrates that the framework scales effectively and enables practical reasoning about complex parameterized behaviors. 

1 Introduction 

Many modern digital systems are designed as the combination of interacting pro-cesses coordinated by a domain-specific scheduler to implement a cyclic execution pattern. Within this design pattern, which we refer to as Scheduler-Restricted Asynchronous systems (SRA), the scheduler orchestrates process execution in discrete phases, without preemptions, so that the traditional interleaving model of concurrency is restricted to a result in a structured duty cycle. The SRA paradigm is adopted in various domains, including embedded control and sys-tems on chip, with the prominent example of SystemC [16], and has been the subject of significant research efforts in formal verification [12, 7, 18, 28, 21]. In this work, we focus on configurable SRA systems, that are compact, pa-rameterized descriptions of unbounded families of SRA. A configurable SRA S

defines a set of concrete SRA; for each configuration C satisfying given configu-ration constraints Γ , there is a corresponding SRA S[C] resulting from a (legal)  

> arXiv:2605.21385v2 [cs.LO] 26 May 2026 2Cimatti et al.

instantiation of the parameters with the object and interconnections specified by C.Configurable design is widely adopted, for example in software product lines, firmware for heat pump control or generic railways control procedures, for its ability to factor out the commonalities of the possible products. The W-development process [23] is composed of a first phase, where the general traits of the domain are designed and analyzed, and several application-specific phases, where the characteristics of each product are chosen. Our goal is to perform parameterized verification , proving that a given generic, quantified specification φ holds for all possible instantiations, i.e. for all C such that C | = Γ , S[C] |= φ. This contrasts with the simpler task of verifying each concrete SRA S[C] separately, where the processes and their interconnections are fixed. The advantage of parameterized verification is that the effort is carried out, at the configurable SRA level, earlier in the development process, so that the generic application can be certified once and for all. The verification of each concrete SRA S[C] is limited to checking that C | = Γ .We propose a deductive verification approach for the parameterized verifica-tion of configurable SRA systems. We adopt an object-oriented modeling lan-guage. Classes represent process types and are equipped with a state machine, whose transitions are associated with guards and effects described as methods in an imperative-style language. Distinguishing features include the ability to repre-sent configurations, to quantify over unbounded collections and domain-specific types, and to define a generic scheduling policy and generic properties. Our main technical contributions are a contract-based, deductive approach that combines the following ingredients: (i) in order to prove top-level invariant properties, a set of compositional proof rules are used to abstract the details of the scheduling policy and decompose global properties into per-class obliga-tions; (ii) an automated summarization of the methods invoked by the scheduler, which supports an abstraction from the implementation details; and (iii) model simplification with respect to the nature of the space of configurations, in order to reduce the complexity of the verification conditions. The verification framework was implemented on top of Dafny [22], whose lan-guage is very suitable to express the features of configurable SRA systems. We automatically generate both the Dafny models as well as the contracts for the process implementations. We then apply our compositional strategy to prove that a given specification φ holds for all the possible valid configurations us-ing the automatically-generated implementation contracts and a user-supplied (quantified) invariant, by discharging a sequence of proof obligations using the Dafny prover. This paper generalizes our previous case-study works [9, 10] to a domain-independent framework for configurable SRA systems. In particular, we intro-duce a set-based formalization, automatic generation of implementation con-tracts, and a general compositional verification strategy. We carried out an experimental evaluation over benchmarks from industrial railway control systems and embedded system control. The analyzed models Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 3

comprise tens of thousands of lines of code and automatically generated con-tracts. All of these were automatically proved by Dafny to hold on the corre-sponding implementations. We also demonstrate the impact of the simplifications driven by the configuration constraints, that were proved correct, and we estab-lished multiple system level safety properties for all possible configurations . The results demonstrate that the approach is able to benefit from the expressive-ness of deductive verification without having to deal with manual annotations sacrificing automation and scalability. 

Outline. Section 2 reviews the related work. Section 3 introduces the syntax and semantics of configurable SRA systems. Section 4 formalizes the problem and presents the compositional verification strategy. Section 5 describes the tool chain, and Section 6 presents the experimental evaluation. Section 7 concludes with future work. Additional material (example, contract-generation algorithm, and detailed experimental data) is available in the appendix. 

2 Related Work 

Software Product Lines (SPLs) study the design of families of products, each defined by a selection of features [6]. The SPL verification problem amounts to proving the correctness of (every product in) the family [29, 27, 19]. Differently from our work, SPLs typically focus on models of software systems, not on processes orchestrated by a scheduler. More importantly, feature models in SPLs are typically restricted to finite sets (and not unbounded families) of products. Various works deal with the verification of SystemC [28, 14, 7], a well known design language for SRA systems. Tasche et al. [28] propose a deductive ver-ification framwork where VerCors [5] is used as a backend to verify SystemC programs. The works in [14, 7] present fully algorithmic approaches based on explicit-state model checking and on the ESST extension with software model checking techniques [13]. The work in [12] discusses the verification of railways interlockings as SRA systems with a domain-specific scheduler. All these works focus on verifying a single SRA, composed by a finite number of statically ar-ranged threads, rather than an unbounded family of systems. Also related are the deductive verification frameworks for parameterized sys-tems such as Ivy [25, 1, 26, 30]. Their models are directly expressed as logical formulae with uninterpreted functions and quantifiers. This is a crucial differ-ence, as our framework allows the users to write programs in a control-logic language, with native notions of execution cycle and synchronization primitives. This design choice is important for industrial adoption, where engineers are more comfortable writing code than quantified first-order specifications. We also au-tomatically extract declarative specifications in the form of contracts from the code, similarly to [17]. Cutoff results [4] establish that the verification of unbounded families can be reduced to checking a finite number of instances. These results typically are limited to fixed topologies with strong structural constraints. In contrast, our 4 Cimatti et al. 

framework can deal with system topologies described by a set of configuration constraints, that provide greater modeling flexibility. Somewhat related is the IronFleet framework [20], that leverages Dafny for mechanically verifying the safety and liveness of practical distributed system implementations. IronFleet starts with a global abstract specification, with a proof strategy based on refinement between state machines. Our work deals with a collection of component programs, and relies on compositional contract-based reasoning. Finally, IronFleet’s case studies are primarily distributed systems, whereas we focus on SRA systems. Our previous papers [9, 10] are direct predecessors of this work. They focus on specific railway systems and toolchain instances, while in this paper we present a general framework with improved methodology. Section 6 quantifies the impact of these methodological changes. 

3 Configurable SRA Systems 

Informally, a configurable Scheduler-Restricted Asynchronous (SRA) system con-sists of a set of class declarations together with a scheduler description that coordinates instances’ executions. Classes serve as templates for generating pro-cesses, expressed as extended finite state machines (EFSMs). Each class defines local behavior through transitions, consisting of a guard (a boolean expression), an effect (a program statement), and a specific scheduling phase in which the transition can be executed. The scheduler is also defined as an EFSM that co-ordinates the execution of class instances, as depicted in Figure 1, and whose locations correspond to scheduling phases. The definitions of both the process classes and the scheduler are parameterized in terms of (unbounded) sets of related objects. An instantiation of a system is then given by a configuration ,specifying the concrete set of objects that are controlled by the scheduler and their mutual connections. Scheduler transitions are divided into self-loop transitions (from phase p to itself), in which all process instances execute one of their transitions marked with p (if any), and phase change transitions, in which the internal state of the scheduler is updated, but no process transition is executed. A sequence of scheduler transitions starting from a designated initial phase l0 and ending in a designated final phase lf then forms a scheduling cycle . A run of the system consists of a sequence of scheduling cycles. 

3.1 Syntax Type System The language provides basic types ( Int , Bool ), finite enumer-ation sorts, user-defined class types C, and immutable set types Set ⟨C⟩. Two additional special sorts model timing and events: Timer and Event ; timers count the number of global execution cycles, while events are special boolean fields. We also define a special enumeration type PhaseEnum that represents the scheduler’s locations (phases), with distinguished initial and final values. Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 5

Fig. 1: SRA: architectural view (left) and dynamic view (right).                                                                                                                   

> Types
> σ::= Int |Bool |Enum
> τ::= σ|C|Timer |Event |Set ⟨C⟩
> Expressions
> e::= c|x|x.f |e1±e2|e1∗e2
> |if bthen e1else e2| | e|
> b::= true |false |e1=e2|e1< e 2
> |¬b|b1∧b2|x∈e|e1⊆e2|e1!! e2
> |e1∪e2|(∀x:: x∈e. b )|(∃x:: x∈e. b )
> Statements
> S::= x:= e;|x:= ∗;|if bthen Selse S
> |∀x:: x∈E{x.f := e;}|assume b;|assert b;|S;S|ε

Fig. 2: Types, expressions and statements. 

Classes A class C is defined by a class declaration that specifies the structure and behavior of a finite state machine template. Each class declaration consists of variable declarations, parameter declarations and transition declarations. Vari-able declarations ( var x : σ) introduce mutable scalar fields, some of which can be tagged as input . Moreover, each class has a special location variable of a finite enumeration type ( LocationEnumC for class type C) representing the loca-tions of the EFSM. Parameter declarations ( param p : σ) introduce immutable constants, and set declarations ( set s : Set ⟨D⟩) introduce immutable collections of objects, where D is any user-defined class type. The class signature ΣC of a class C is the set of symbols introduced by its declaration. Each class also declares a finite set of transitions . A transition specifies a guard-effect pair that defines when and how state changes occur, and is given by a tuple ( lstart , G, l end , E, p ), where lstart and lend are class locations, G is a boolean expression (the guard), 

E is a statement (the effect), and p is a phase enumeration value indicating dur-ing which scheduler phase the transition is eligible for execution. Every class contains three mandatory methods: an init method for setting initial variable values, an exec method for local execution (Section 3.2), and a tick method for updating timers. 

Expression and statement language. Guards and effects in transitions are speci-fied with expressions and statements in the language defined in Figure 2. Basic expressions include constants ( c), variables ( x), field access ( x.f ), and set car-6 Cimatti et al. 

dinality ( |e|). Boolean expressions extend standard logical operators with set membership ( x ∈ e), subset relations ( e1 ⊆ e2), disjointness assertions ( e1 !! e2), and constrained quantification where ∀x :: x ∈ e. b and ∃x :: x ∈ e. b require 

e to have set type. We omit the description of the full type rules for brevity. Quantified assignments ∀x :: x ∈ E {x.f := e; } are restricted to simple field assignments: E must be of set type, f must be a mutable scalar field of class C,

e is an expression that may reference x (i.e., no nested quantified assignments, method invocations, or other statements are allowed). The language enforces several restrictions. The distinguished variable location 

cannot be assigned in transition effects: location changes occur implicitly when transitions execute. Event variables can only be assigned to true in effects; they are reset to false automatically when consumed by transitions. Moreover, events are restricted syntactically: a guard is a conjunction of an event-free ex-pression and a list of event variables. Variables declared as input are externally controlled and cannot be assigned in effects. 

Scheduler Signature and Transitions The scheduler signature ΣSched ex-tends the union of all class signatures with additional symbols of the form All Ci

of type Set ⟨Ci⟩ interpreted as the set of instances of Ci in the configuration, a variable phase of type PhaseEnum for the scheduler’s current location, and a boolean variable executed for each class instance. Scheduler transitions define the global execution steps of the system. Each transition is specified by a guard, a start location p, and a target location p′. The guard is a ΣSched -expression, referencing only events, timers, and the executed 

flags of instances. Configuration constraints describe structural restrictions on admissible con-figurations (e.g., disjointness relations or cardinality bounds). They are formulas over ΣSched that mention only immutable symbols (set-valued fields and constant parameters). 

Definition 1 (Configurable SRA System). A configurable Scheduler-Restricted Asynchronous system S = ( {C1, . . . , C k}, Sched , Γ ) consists of a finite set of class declarations {C1, . . . , C k}, a scheduler description Sched , and a set of con-figuration constraints Γ over the immutable symbols. 

3.2 Operational Semantics Definition 2 (Configuration). A configuration C for a finite set of classes 

{C1, . . . , C k} consists of: (i) a finite universe Ui = {oi, 1, . . . , o i,n i } of object instances for each class Ci (domain for sort Ci); and (ii) an interpretation for all set-valued fields of Ci (interpretation for set predicates) and for all parameter fields of Ci (constant values) for each instance o ∈ U i.

A configuration is the equivalent of a first-order structure, providing universes for each class and interpretations for set-valued fields and parameter fields (the non-mutable part of the system). Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 7

Local Semantics The local semantics define how individual class instances behave within a given configuration. The local execution follows a small-step se-mantics: each invocation of the exec method on a single instance constitutes one atomic step. The exec method takes a phase parameter that determines which category of transitions to consider, implementing the local execution through the following algorithm: 1. Filter all class transitions to include only those matching the specified phase; 2. Select the first transition whose guard is enabled in the current local state, according to the order in which transitions were declared in the class; 3. If an enabled transition is found: execute its effect statement sequence, up-date the control location to the target location, and reset to false every event variable that the occured in the transition’s guard; 4. If no enabled transition exists: perform a stutter step where the local state remains unchanged. 

Global Execution Semantics The global execution model coordinates class instances through the scheduler , following a big-step semantics. 

Definition 3 (Global State). Given a configuration C with universe U, a 

global state S is a function that assigns: (i) for each instance o ∈ U , an in-terpretation for all scalar fields and set-valued fields of o; and (ii) a location 

S(phase ) : PhaseEnum , and a boolean value S(executed ) for each instance. 

The initial global state of the system is established by initializing all instances and setting the scheduler to its initial location: each instance o’s init method sets its scalar fields to their declared initial values, timers to inactive , events to false , and executed to false .

Global Execution. The effect of a scheduler transition from phase p to p′ depends on its type: 

– Self-loop transitions (p = p′): The scheduler invokes the exec method of each instance in an arbitrary order, passing p as the argument, and sets the executed flag of each instance to true . Note that local execution of an instance may read and modify both its own fields and fields of other instances; therefore, the order in which instances are executed can affect the resulting post-state. 

– Non-self-loop transitions (p̸ = p′): The scheduler updates phase to p′ and resets executed to false for all instances. If the target is the final location, the scheduler additionally invokes each instance’s tick() method to update timers. We denote a scheduler transition from global state S to S′ as S p→p′

−−−→ S′. A visual representation of the global execution is given in Figure 1, with the scheduler top coordinating the local execution of class instances within a cycle. 8 Cimatti et al. 

Definition 4 (Scheduling Cycle). A scheduling cycle is a sequence of global states S0, S 1, . . . , S n such that: 

– S0(phase ) = l0 (the cycle starts at the initial location) 

– For each i < n , we have Sipi→pi+1 

−−−−−→ Si+1 for some scheduler transition 

– Sn(phase ) = lf (the cycle ends at the final location) 

After completing a cycle (reaching lf ), the scheduler transitions back to l0 (set-ting phase accordingly) to begin the next cycle; in such transitions, input vari-ables of all instances can be externally updated, while all other fields remain unchanged. A run of the system consists of a sequence of scheduling cycles, starting with the initial global state. An example of an SRA system is provided in Appendix A. 

4 Compositional Verification of Configurable SRA 

We start by formalizing the verification problem for configurable SRA systems and then present a compositional verification strategy to solve it. A single con-figurable SRA system describes an unbounded family of possible SRA, each re-sulting from an instantiation satisfying its configuration constraints. Our goal is proving at once that for every legal instantiation, at the end of every scheduling cycle, a given global property holds. 

4.1 Verification Problem 

Global properties φ are safety assertions over the global state expressed as boolean ΣSched -expressions. They may refer to both immutable and mutable instance fields to capture invariants such as mutual exclusion or consistency requirements. 

Definition 5 (Parameterized Verification Problem). Given a configurable SRA system S (with constraints Γ ) and a global property φ, the parameterized safety verification problem is to prove that, for all configurations C that satisfy all elements in Γ , for each state S in a run of the system such that S(phase ) = lf ,the property holds: C, S |= φ.

In this paper we focus on properties checked at the end of scheduling cycles (i.e., when phase = lf ), but the same compositional obligations can be adapted to properties required at other phases or over all reachable states. 

4.2 Compositional Verification 

Our deductive verification strategy decomposes global reasoning about the sched-uler into a collection of local method contracts, combined through first-order en-tailment checks. Rather than modeling the scheduler explicitly, we reason com-positionally: each class method is verified in isolation, while global correctness is obtained by proving that these local effects preserve a global invariant Inv .Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 9

Local Contracts A local contract for a method m of class C is a Hoare triple 

{Pre } m {Post } where Pre and Post are ΣC -expressions. Moreover, Post may reference pre-state values via the old operator: for any expression e, old (e)denotes the value of e immediately before the method executes. The contract is valid if, for every configuration C satisfying Γ and every instance o of C,whenever o’s state satisfies Pre before executing m, it satisfies Post afterwards. In the following, we will focus on specific contracts that are used in our compositional argument. In particular, for each class C and for each phase p of the scheduler, we search for ΣC -expressions IC , TC (p), and KC such that the following contracts are valid: 

{true } init () {IC } {true } exec (p) {TC (p)} {true } tick () {KC }

These contracts can be generated automatically from class definitions and veri-fied independently using standard program verification techniques. 

Global Entailment Checks Using the local contracts above, we formulate a set of entailment checks showing that, for every configuration satisfying Γ , a global invariant Inv is preserved by every scheduler transition and implies φ at the end of each cycle. Sub-expressions wrapped in old (·) are evaluated in the pre-state (before the transition); all checks can be compiled to first-order validity queries dischargeable by SMT solvers. We write All for the union of all All Ci .

Self-loop execution preserves Inv . For each self-loop scheduler transition at phase p, the scheduler invokes exec (p) on every instance in an arbitrary or-der. To show that Inv is preserved by the whole interleaving, we reduce the problem to a single-instance check: it suffices to show that executing any one instance preserves Inv , then an induction on the number of executed instances results in preservation for the full interleaving. For a single-instance step we need to know what holds for an instance c

just before c executes. The global scheduler guard Gp→p holds at the start of the self-loop, but it may be invalidated by earlier executions of other instances. We therefore introduce a local condition g′

> p

—a per-instance ΣC -expression that approximates the relevant information from the global guard and remains valid throughout the interleaving. Concretely, g′ 

> p

must satisfy two side-conditions: 

(a) Establishment: Γ |=  Inv ∧ Gp→p

 ⇒ c.g ′

> p

.

(b) Stability (for every class D and d̸ = c of type D): Γ |=  old (Inv ∧ c.g ′

> p

) ∧

d.T D (p) ∧ d. executed  ⇒ c.g ′

> p

.

Given a valid g′

> p

, the main preservation check states that executing a single instance c of class C under g′ 

> p

preserves Inv :

Γ |=



old  Inv ∧ phase = p ∧ c.g ′

> p

 ∧ c.T C (p) ∧ c. executed 



⇒ Inv 

In practice, a common choice for g′ 

> p

is ¬c. executed (instance c has not yet executed in phase p), which is trivially stable under other instances’ executions. 10 Cimatti et al. 

We then check additional simpler preservation conditions for the initializa-tion, for phase transitions, as well as the implication of φ at the end of each cycle: 

Initialization establishes Inv . 

Γ |=



∀c ∈ All .  c.I C ∧ ¬ c. executed  ∧ phase = l0



⇒ Inv Phase transitions preserve Inv . For each scheduler edge p → p′ with p̸ = p′ and guard gp→p′ :

– Non-final transition ( p′̸ = lf ). The scheduler updates its control location and resets all executed flags: 

Γ |=  old (Inv ∧ phase = p ∧ gp→p′ ) ∧ phase = p′ ∧∀c ∈ All . ¬c. executed  ⇒ Inv 

– Final transition ( p′ = lf ). The scheduler additionally invokes tick () on each instance: 

Γ |= old (Inv ∧ phase = p ∧ gp→lf ) ∧ phase = lf

∧ ∀ c ∈ All .  ¬c. executed ∧ c.K C

!

⇒ Inv 

– Reset ( lf → l0). External inputs may change while non-input fields are preserved. Let InputChange ≡ V  

> non-input f

∀c ∈ All . c.f = old (c.f ). 

Γ |=  old (Inv ∧ phase = lf ) ∧ InputChange ∧ phase = l0

 ⇒ Inv Inv implies the safety property. At the end of every cycle the invariant must imply the target property: 

Γ |=  Inv ∧ phase = lf

 ⇒ φ

Theorem 1 (Compositional Soundness). If all local contracts are valid and all global entailment checks succeed for an invariant Inv , then φ holds at the end of every scheduling cycle in every run of S, for all configurations satisfying Γ .Proof sketch. The proof is by induction on scheduler transitions. Initialization establishes Inv by the initialization entailment check and valid local init con-tracts; for preservation, we consider both phase-change scheduler transitions and self-loop scheduler transitions, where the latter are further decomposed into individual instance transitions (with an inner induction over the execution in-terleaving), using the corresponding entailment checks together with valid local 

exec and tick contracts; finally, at states with phase = lf , φ follows from Inv 

by the last entailment check. The full proof is provided in Appendix C. More generally, the problem of finding a suitable invariant can be reduced to the (undecidable) problem of safety verification of parameterized systems [3]. Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 11 

5 Implementation in Dafny 

The framework described in this paper has been implemented as a toolchain built on top of the Dafny verification system [22]. Dafny was chosen as it is a mature tool, which natively supports the combination of object-orientation, imperative statements, and quantified first-order logic, allowing a natural formalization of our models. The toolchain takes as input a description of a parameterized SRA system written in a high-level control-logic language, and generates a SysML description, executable C code, and a Dafny model for verification. The implementation builds on an already existing toolchain. In previous work [9], the framework focused on showing the correctness of the generated executable C code, and as such the generated Dafny was made to resemble this implementation. Components were connected through lists, and assignments were performed by iteration over the lists. The new implementation instead uses the set-theoretic formalization presented in Sec. 3, and quantified assignments. Furthermore, safety properties were previously proven to be inductive for each individual transition separately. Instead they are now proven over the exec 

method of each class, as described in Sec. 4. 

5.1 Automatic Contract Generation 

Local contracts for methods can be generated automatically from the class defi-nitions. Thanks to the restrictions in our input language, this process is relatively straightforward. Due to lack of space, we cannot include the full details here, but we report them in Appendix B. Here, we only sketch the procedure for gener-ating contracts for the exec method. At a high level, this involves the following three steps: (1) symbolic transformation of transition effects, (2) encoding of individual transitions, and (3) combination of the latter for the execution con-tract. For each transition effect E, we compute a symbolic effect formula Effect E

that captures the state update performed by executing E. This is done by for-ward symbolic execution, which computes a symbolic map ME associating each variable with an expression over pre-state values. Assignments update the corre-sponding map entry; conditionals yield conditional expressions; and quantified assignments generate lambda expressions for function fields. The effects of in-dividual transitions are then combined together to obtain the contract for the 

exec method as a disjunction of the possible transitions, in which individual transition guards are augmented with constraints enforcing the transition pri-ority (a transition t is to be executed only if there exists no other t′ declared before t in the class definition whose guard evaluates to true). 

5.2 Optimization: Quantifier grounding 

If configuration constraints include constraints of the form |s| = k for set-valued field s, we can use this information to rewrite quantified expressions and state-ments into equivalent, simpler forms. Specifically, universal and existential quan-tifiers over s can be expanded into conjunctions or disjunctions over the k ele-ments of s. A similar encoding can be applied in case of bound constraints of 12 Cimatti et al. 

the form |s| ≤ k. This transformation can be applied both at the level of code (rewriting quantified statements in method bodies) and at the level of contracts (e.g., quantified postconditions), resulting in quantifier-free verification condi-tions that are easier for SMT solvers to handle. Furthermore, we can prove that these rewrites result in equivalent specifications, assuming that the constraints hold. Thus, when proving satisfaction of the quantifer grounded specifications, and the safety properties, the same holds for the original specifications. We implement this optimization for constraints k ≤ 1 in the Dafny encod-ing. We keep the original set-valued fields in the ghost state (i.e., state only accessible to specifications) and generate new object-valued fields (which are possibly nullable for bounded constraints) as the grounded version. We generate both the original and grounded version of every specification, over the respec-tive fields. Then, we add lemmas stating the equivalence of the two versions, with two types of assumptions: (i) the sizes of the set-valued fields are according to the given constraints, and (ii) the object of each set-valued field equals the respective object-valued field. Such assumptions are added for every field-pair occuring in the specifications whose equivalence are being proven. For example, for a quantifier grounded nullable field s (i.e., now an object), we add also the original field as ghost, sghost . Then, for a grounded predicate p referencing s we generate also the original, non-grounded pghost referencing sghost , and a lemma stating, where |sghost | ≤ 1 ∈ Γ :

Γ ∧ (|sghost | = 0 ⇒ s = null) ∧ (|sghost | = 1 ⇒ { s} = sghost ) |= p ⇐⇒ pghost .

6 Experimental Evaluation 

Experimental Setup We evaluate the implementation of our framework on benchmarks from previous work on SystemC verification [28] and from industrial case studies obtained within a collaboration with the Italian railway infrastruc-ture operator RFI 3. The verified applications were designed by the RFI signaling engineers using the AIDA environment [2, 11], while formal verification experts interacted with the toolchain described in this paper. The cases used in this work have been presented in previous application papers [9, 10], where verification was performed with a preliminary version of the toolchain. The present results were obtained with a consolidated and generalized version of the framework, with the following differences. First, collections of objects are represented as sets (as well as lists); second, the toolchain implements a more general proof strategy, that is not limited to the AIDA domain specific scheduling policy, and that has been proved correct in the previous sections; third, the quantifier grounding transformation provably results in equivalent specifications (Section 5.2). We evaluate the toolchain on three different aspects: verification of local con-tracts (i.e. all the methods satisfy the automatically generated candidate con-tracts), safety properties , and quantifier grounding proofs . We report the number  

> 3Due to the properietary nature of the applications, the case studies cannot be pub-licly shared.

Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 13 

Table 1: Verification statistics for local contracts                                                                        

> Sys. Version # Ass. Tot. time Tot. RC Exec. time Exec. RC Guard time Guard RC Eff. time Eff. RC RCS Set 105 2s 2.72M 0s 1.55M 0s 0.16M 1s 1.65M RPS List 994 4233s 9436.56M 350s 724.29M 3465s 7034.48M 396s 1617.89M List+QG 998 925s 2529.53M 403s 671.75M 60s 188.41M 442s 1617.18M Set 963 729s 2154.06M 345s 675.18M 7s 21.37M 356s 1401.94M Set+QG 963 620s 1851.96M 234s 388.14M 5s 13.7M 362s 1401.69M SCL List 408 1001s 3814.77M 97s 346.38M 1s 2.4M 895s 3446.88M List+QG 411 924s 3528.9M 31s 90.37M 1s 1.6M 886s 3418.88M Set 399 969s 3763.57M 82s 317.41M 1s 1.91M 880s 3425.74M Set+QG 399 910s 3518.73M 22s 80.44M 1s 1.5M 880s 3418.78M

Table 2: Verification statistics summary for safety properties                                                                  

> Sys. Prop.
> List List+QG Set Set+QG
> Trans. Exec. Trans. Exec. Trans. Exec. Trans. Exec. Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC RPS Sum 16708s 42544M 755s 1899M 6195s 15508M 514s 1195M 12888s 33769M 797s 1908M 4096s 10064M 497s 1187M Max 2224s 5580M 116s 277M 370s 863M 72s 188M 1851s 4866M 92s 226M 238s 555M 59s 134M SCL 113s 42M 11s 32M 12s 39M 13s 38M 12s 41M 12s 36M 11s 38M 13s 35M

of assertions, and the performance measured in terms of time elapsed and of Dafny RC 4. The stated size of Dafny encodings includes the specifications. We compare: (i) the current set-based formalization against the previous list-based formalization, (ii) the quantifier grounded encoding against the non-optimized one, (iii) the current proof strategy of proving safety properties over the exec method of each class, against the previous strategy with proofs over individual transitions. All the experiments were performed on a cluster of iden-tical nodes (AMD EPYC 7413 24-Core Processor, 96CPU, 1.0TB RAM), with each verification task being assigned 8GB of RAM, and using Dafny 4.11.0. 

Experimental Results The verification results for local contracts of all sys-tems are summarized in Table 1. The total time and resource count (RC) denotes verification of all methods against their contracts. The execute column is the verification of only the exec method against its contract. The guard and effect 

columns show only the verification of guards and effects, respectively. Note that the set formalization contain no guard methods. The results for safety properties are summarized in Table 2. The transition columns are the results of verifying properties over each of the transitions, whereas the execute columns are the re-sults for verifying directly over the exec method (which executes the individual transitions). The detailed results are reported in Appendix D. 

Generalized Robot Controller System The Robot Controller System (RCS) is a SystemC case study proposed in [28], where a controller decides the move-ment based on the inputs of a fixed number of sensors . The property states that the controller never decides to move in a direction in which an obstacle is per-ceived. We generalize the RCS to include an unbounded number of sensors. The  

> 4

The Dafny resource count (RC) is a measure of the number of steps taken to complete the proof. RC is deterministic for a specific Dafny version. 14 Cimatti et al. 

Dafny encoding is made up of about 800 LoC. Verification of the safety property, which was not inductive and so was manually extended to form the invariant, took 18s and used 63.26M RC. The full details of the example can be found in Appendix A. 

Railways Protection System (RPS) The RPS [9] is an industrial safety-critical system, developed by RFI, that ensures that workers can safely access railway lines for maintenance. We verify the control logic of the RPS, which is responsible for authorizing workers’ requests to access the line based on the state of the railway network. The verification statistics are given for four different sets of generated codebases, each between 11k and 14k LoC (with the list-based ones on the higher end). The safety properties express the fact that authorization cannot be given in the presence of unsafe inputs. We succesfully verify the same 21 safety properties as in [9], in addition to four new ones obtained from the railway engineers de-signing the system. All but four of the properties were already inductive over the state machine transitions. The non-inductive properties were manually extended to form the invariant. The summary gives total time and resource count for all properties, as well as the highest for a single property. In the quantifier grounded version, verifying the 516 lemmas stating the equivalence between quantifier grounded and non-optimized versions of specifi-cations took 60s (with a total of 179M RC). 

Signal Control Logic (SCL) The SCL benchmark concerns the control logic for a railway signal system. The SCL was originally described in [10] to demon-strate the use of model checking techniques implemented in nuXmv [8] for the generation of invariants and counterexamples on manually generated finite ab-stractions of the SCL. As such, no direct comparison with the techniques pro-posed here is possible. We prove that at the end of each control cycle the signal aspects (colors) are set correctly. Each generated code base is about 6k LoC. In the quantifier grounded version, verification of the 210 equivalence lemmas took 4s (with a total of 8M RC). 

Discussion From the experimental results we can draw the following conclu-sions. First, the approach is applicable in practice to prove safety properties for all system configurations. Second, the approach scales to realistic case studies. The automated summarization of methods into candidate contracts is effective in reducing the manual effort required for verification, and requires reasonable computational effort. Third, the set-theoretical formalization is superior to the list-based one in terms of verification performance, hiding unnecessary details. Similarly, the quantifier grounding optimization significantly reduces verification time and resource consumption in most cases, although the effect is more dra-matic for less optimized verification tasks (e.g., lists without grounding). Finally, the verification of safety properties over the exec method is significantly faster Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 15 

than over each transition. We conjecture that this is due to a better usage of the underlying SMT solver in the exec version, which can reuse information across multiple branches instead of restarting for each transition. In general however, the careful control of the Dafny proof engine will require further investigation. 

7 Conclusion 

We presented a unified framework for the verification of configurable systems expressed as a collection of process types orchestrated by a domain-specific scheduler. Each process type is described as an extended finite-state machine, with actions attached to transitions expressed as imperative code. First-order quantified expressions and statements enable the direct logic-based representa-tion of the space of possible configurations, with variable number of processes and complex interconnections. The verification approach is compositional and contract-based: proving that a global safety property holds at the end of every scheduling cycle is reduced to checking local contracts on each process type. The approach is implemented on top of Dafny, and relies on the automatic generation of contracts and annotations in order to reduce the manual effort required for verification. The experimental evaluation, carried out on several real-world case studies, demonstrated the generality, the effectiveness and the scalability of the approach. There are several directions for future work. First, we intend to further improve automation. Currently, the decomposition of the global verification, the extraction of contracts from methods implementations, the application of configuration-specific optimizations and the compilation into Dafny all require no user intervention. However, in general the user may have to provide addi-tional inductive invariants for the properties of interest. While in our case stud-ies the invariants were often straightforward extensions of the desired properties, this remains a manual step. A promising direction is to leverage parameterized model checking techniques for automatic invariant discovery, e.g. [26, 31], pos-sibly extended with abstraction strategies similar to [15, 24]. Our preliminary experiments in this direction show encouraging results, and we plan to develop a fully automated pipeline in future work. On a different direction, we intend to extend our approach to consider more general classes of properties, such as safety properties spanning multiple scheduling cycles and liveness properties. Finally, an important direction for future work will concern the application of formal or semi-formal techniques (e.g. equivalence checking, translation validation, or co-simulation) to establish the functional equivalence between the models used for verification and the actual (automatically generated) C implementations de-ployed in production. 16 Cimatti et al. 

References 

1. Alberti, F., Ghilardi, S., Sharygina, N.: A framework for the verification of pa-rameterized infinite-state systems. Fundam. Informaticae 150 (1), 1–24 (2017). https://doi.org/10.3233/FI-2017-1458, https://doi.org/10.3233/FI-2017-1458 

2. Amendola, A., Becchi, A., Cavada, R., Cimatti, A., Griggio, A., Scaglione, G., Susi, A., Tacchella, A., Tessi, M.: A model-based approach to the design, verification and deployment of railway interlocking system. In: ISoLA (3). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12478, pp. 240–254. Springer (2020) 3. Apt, K.R., Kozen, D.C.: Limits for automatic verification of finite-state concurrent systems. Information Processing Letters 22 (6), 307–309 (1986). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0020-0190(86)90071-2, https:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0020019086900712 

4. Bloem, R., Jacobs, S., Khalimov, A., Konnov, I., Rubin, S., Veith, H., Wid-der, J.: Decidability in parameterized verification. SIGACT News 47 (2), 53– 64 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1145/2951860.2951873, https://doi.org/10.1145/ 2951860.2951873 

5. Blom, S., Huisman, M.: The vercors tool for verification of concurrent pro-grams. In: Jones, C.B., Pihlajasaari, P., Sun, J. (eds.) FM 2014: For-mal Methods - 19th International Symposium, Singapore, May 12-16, 2014. Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8442, pp. 127–131. Springer (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-06410-9“˙9, https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-319-06410-9\_9 

6. B¨ ockle, G., Pohl, K., van der Linden, F.: A framework for software product line engineering. In: Software Product Line Engineering, pp. 19–38. Springer (2005) 7. Campana, D., Cimatti, A., Narasamdya, I., Roveri, M.: An analytic evaluation of systemc encodings in promela. In: SPIN. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6823, pp. 90–107. Springer (2011) 8. Cavada, R., Cimatti, A., Dorigatti, M., Griggio, A., Mariotti, A., Micheli, A., Mover, S., Roveri, M., Tonetta, S.: The nuXmv symbolic model checker. In: Biere, A., Bloem, R. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification. pp. 334–342. Springer Interna-tional Publishing, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08867-9“˙22 9. Cavada, R., Cimatti, A., Griggio, A., Lidstr¨ om, C., Redondi, G., Scaglione, G., Tessi, M., Trenti, D.: Automated parameterized verification of a railway protection system with dafny. In: Piskac, R., Rakamari´ c, Z. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification. pp. 364–376. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-98685-7“˙17 10. Cavada, R., Cimatti, A., Griggio, A., Lidstr¨ om, C., Redondi, G., Tessi, M., Trenti, D.: Formal analysis of a railway signaling block designed in AIDA. In: ter Beek, M.H., Dutilleul, S.C., Lecomte, T. (eds.) Reliability, Safety, and Security of Railway Systems. Modelling, Analysis, Verification, and Certifica-tion - 6th International Conference, RSSRail 2025, Pisa, Italy, November 26-28, 2025, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 16236, pp. 303– 312. Springer (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-032-10762-6“˙23, https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-032-10762-6\_23 

11. Cavada, R., Cimatti, A., Griggio, A., Susi, A.: A formal IDE for railways: Research challenges. In: SEFM Workshops. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13765, pp. 107–115. Springer (2022) 12. Cimatti, A., Giunchiglia, F., Mongardi, G., Romano, D., Torielli, F., Traverso, P.: Formal verification of a railway interlocking system using model checking. Formal Aspects Comput. 10 (4), 361–380 (1998) Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 17 13. Cimatti, A., Narasamdya, I., Roveri, M.: Software model checking with ex-plicit scheduler and symbolic threads. Log. Methods Comput. Sci. 8(2) (2012). https://doi.org/10.2168/LMCS-8(2:18)2012, https://doi.org/10.2168/ LMCS-8(2:18)2012 

14. Cimatti, A., Narasamdya, I., Roveri, M.: Software model checking systemc. IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. 32 (5), 774–787 (2013) 15. Clarke, E.M., Talupur, M., Veith, H.: Proving ptolemy right: The environment abstraction framework for model checking concurrent systems. In: TACAS. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4963, pp. 33–47. Springer (2008) 16. Committee, S.S.: Ieee standard for standard systemc language reference man-ual. IEEE Std 1666-2023 (Revision of IEEE Std 1666-2011) pp. 1–618 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2023.10246125 17. Ghosal, S., Jonsson, B., R¨ ummer, P.: An active learning approach to synthesizing program contracts. In: Ferreira, C., Willemse, T.A.C. (eds.) Software Engineering and Formal Methods - 21st International Conference, SEFM 2023, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, November 6-10, 2023, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 14323, pp. 126–144. Springer (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47115-5“˙8, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47115-5\_8 

18. Große, D., Drechsler, R.: Formal verification of LTL formulas for systemc designs. In: ISCAS (5). pp. 245–248. IEEE (2003) 19. Gruler, A., Leucker, M., Scheidemann, K.D.: Modeling and model checking soft-ware product lines. In: FMOODS. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5051, pp. 113–131. Springer (2008) 20. Hawblitzel, C., Howell, J., Kapritsos, M., Lorch, J.R., Parno, B., Roberts, M.L., Setty, S.T.V., Zill, B.: Ironfleet: proving safety and liveness of practical distributed systems. Commun. ACM 60 (7), 83–92 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1145/3068608, 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3068608 

21. Herber, P., H¨ unnemeyer, B.: Formal verification of systemc designs using the BLAST software model checker. In: ACES-MB@MoDELS. CEUR Workshop Pro-ceedings, vol. 1250, pp. 44–53. CEUR-WS.org (2014) 22. Leino, K.R.M.: Dafny: An automatic program verifier for functional correctness. In: Clarke, E.M., Voronkov, A. (eds.) Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Reasoning - 16th International Conference, LPAR-16, Dakar, Senegal, April 25-May 1, 2010, Revised Selected Papers. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6355, pp. 348–370. Springer (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-17511-4“˙20, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-17511-4\_20 

23. Li, J., Li, Q., Li, J.: The w-model for testing software product lines. In: ISCSCT (1). pp. 690–693. IEEE Computer Society (2008) 24. McMillan, K.L.: Eager abstraction for symbolic model checking. In: Chockler, H., Weissenbacher, G. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification - 30th International Con-ference, CAV 2018, Held as Part of the Federated Logic Conference, FloC 2018, Oxford, UK, July 14-17, 2018, Proceedings, Part I. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10981, pp. 191–208. Springer (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96145-3“˙11, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96145-3\_11 

25. McMillan, K.L., Padon, O.: Ivy: A multi-modal verification tool for distributed algorithms. In: Lahiri, S.K., Wang, C. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification -32nd International Conference, CAV 2020, Los Angeles, CA, USA, July 21-24, 2020, Proceedings, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12225, pp. 190–202. Springer (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-53291-8“˙12, https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-53291-8\_12 18 Cimatti et al. 26. Redondi, G., Cimatti, A., Griggio, A., McMillan, K.L.: Invariant checking for smt-based systems with quantifiers. ACM Trans. Comput. Log. 25 (4), 1–37 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1145/3686153, https://doi.org/10.1145/3686153 

27. Scaletta, M., H¨ ahnle, R., Steinh¨ ofel, D., Bubel, R.: Delta-based verification of software product families. In: GPCE. pp. 69–82. ACM (2021) 28. Tasche, P., Monti, R.E., Drerup, S.E., Blohm, P., Herber, P., Huisman, M.: Deduc-tive verification of parameterized embedded systems modeled in systemc. In: Dim-itrova, R., Lahav, O., Wolff, S. (eds.) Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation - 25th International Conference, VMCAI 2024, London, United Kingdom, January 15-16, 2024, Proceedings, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 14500, pp. 187–209. Springer (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-50521-8“˙9, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-50521-8\_9 

29. Th¨ um, T., Schaefer, I., Hentschel, M., Apel, S.: Family-based deductive verification of software product lines. In: GPCE. pp. 11–20. ACM (2012) 30. Wilcox, J.R., Feldman, Y.M.Y., Padon, O., Shoham, S.: mypyvy: A re-search platform for verification of transition systems in first-order logic. In: Gurfinkel, A., Ganesh, V. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification - 36th Interna-tional Conference, CAV 2024, Montreal, QC, Canada, July 24-27, 2024, Pro-ceedings, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 14682, pp. 71– 85. Springer (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65630-9“˙4, https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-031-65630-9\_4 

31. Yao, J., Tao, R., Gu, R., Nieh, J.: Duoai: Fast, automated inference of induc-tive invariants for verifying distributed protocols. In: Aguilera, M.K., Weather-spoon, H. (eds.) 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2022, Carlsbad, CA, USA, July 11-13, 2022. pp. 485– 501. USENIX Association (2022), https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi22/ presentation/yao Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 19 

A Extended Example: Robot Controller System 

We present an example of a configurable SRA system modeling a robot controller with multiple sensors, inspired by a SystemC case study [28]. The system consists of a controller class and a sensor class, where the controller reads sensor states and decides on movement direction. The scheduler has four phases: Sense (the intial phase), Act , Reset , and End .

A.1 Class Definitions 

We start by defining the classes for the controller and sensors, along with their local transitions. Sensor Class: 

class Sensor { var location : SensLoc // {Ready, Go, NoGo} var executed : Bool input obstacle : Bool // external input event processed : Event // set by controller, treated as a boolean transition senseGo = (Ready, !obstacle, Go, { }, Sense) transition senseNoGo = (Ready, obstacle, NoGo, { }, Sense) transition resetGo = (Go, processed, Ready, { }, Act) transition resetNoGo = (NoGo, processed, Ready, { }, Act) }

The Sensor class detects obstacles and transitions between control states: 

Ready (waiting to sense), Go (no obstacle), or NoGo (obstacle detected). It has an event processed set by the controller to acknowledge the sensor reading. The initialize method (not shown) sets the location to Ready .

Controller Class: 

class Controller { var location : CtrlLoc // {Idle, Moving} var executed : Bool var direction : Direction // {Forward, Stop, Left, Right} set leftSensors : Set<Sensor> set rightSensors : Set<Sensor> set allSensors : Set<Sensor> //{ leftSensors + rightSensors } transition actRight = (Idle, (exists s in leftSensors : s.location == NoGo) && (forall s in rightSensors : s.location == Go), Moving, { direction := Right; forall s in allSensors { s.processed := true; } }, Act) transition actLeft = (Idle, (exists s in rightSensors : s.location == NoGo) && (forall s in leftSensors : s.location == Go), 20 Cimatti et al. 

Moving, { direction := Left; forall s in allSensors { s.processed := true; } }, Act) // similar transition for actForward and actStop, omitted for brevity transition reset = (Moving, true, Idle, { }, Reset) }

The Controller class owns sets of sensors and reads their state via quantified expressions. It decides on movement direction based on sensor readings and signals sensors when it has processed their state. The initialize method (not shown) sets the location to Idle and direction to Stop .

Scheduler. The scheduler in this example has a set of locations PhaseEnum =

{Sense , Act , Reset , End }, with initial phase Sense and final phase End . The scheduler transitions are defined as follows: 1. Self-loop on Sense (p = p′ = Sense ), with guard G1 ≡ ∀ x ∈ All . ¬x. executed 

This transition triggers the local execution of all instances in the Sense 

phase. Since at the start of each cycle executed = false for all instances, the guard is satisfied. After execution, each instance’s executed flag is set to true , disabling the guard. 2. Phase change from Sense to Act (p = Sense , p ′ = Act ), with guard ¬G1.This transition fires once all instances have executed in the Sense phase. 3. Self-loop on Act (p = p′ = Act ), with guard: G2 ≡ ∀ x ∈ All .  ¬x. executed  ∨

(∃s ∈ All Sensor . s. processed ) This transition repeatedly invokes local exe-cution in the Act phase. The guard ensures that the self-loop continues as long as either some instance has not yet executed in this phase or there re-main sensors with a pending processed event, forcing the system to iterate until all events are consumed. 4. Phase change from Act to Reset (p = Act , p ′ = Reset ), with guard ¬G2.This transition fires once all instances have executed in the Act phase and no pending events remain. 5. Self-loop on Reset (p = p′ = Reset ), with guard G3 ≡ ∀ x ∈ All . ¬x. executed 

This transition triggers local execution for the Reset phase. 6. Phase change from Reset to End (p = Reset , p ′ = End ), with guard ¬G3

A scheduling cycle thus consists of the transition sequence S0

> Sense →Sense

−−−−−−−−→ S1

> Sense →Act

−−−−−−−→

S2

> Act →Act

−−−−−→ · · · Act →Reset 

−−−−−−−→ Sj

> Reset →Reset

−−−−−−−−→ Sj+1 

> Reset →End

−−−−−−−→ Sn, where the self-loop on Act may iterate multiple times until all events are processed. Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 21 

Configuration constraints. The system’s structural constraints are given by the following configuration constraints: 

Γ1 ≡ ∀ c :: c in All Controller . c. leftSensors !! c. rightSensors 

Γ2 ≡ ∀ c1 :: c1 in All Controller . ∀c2 :: c2 in All Controller . c 1̸ = c2 ⇒

(c1.leftSensors ∪ c1.rightSensors ) !! ( c2.leftSensors ∪ c2.rightSensors )

Γ3 ≡ ∀ c :: c in All Controller . |c. leftSensors | ≥ 1

Γ4 ≡ ∀ c :: c in All Controller . |c. rightSensors | ≥ 1

Γ5 ≡ ∀ c :: c in All Controller . c. leftSensors ∪ c. rightSensors = allSensors 

We denote with Γ the set {Γ1, Γ 2, Γ 3, Γ 4, Γ 5}. These constraints ensure every controller has at least one sensor on each side, that left and right sensor sets are disjoint within each controller, and that no sensor is shared between different controllers. 

Global Safety Property. The system must satisfy the following safety property: 

Prop ≡ ∀ c :: c in All Controller . (( ∃s :: s in c. leftSensors . s. obstacle ) ⇒ c. direction ̸ = Left )This property states that if any left sensor has detected an obstacle, the controller is not moving left. In our semantics, this property must hold in all reachable states at the end of each scheduler cycle. In fact, the property can also be violated during intermediate phases within cycles. 

A.2 Configuration Example 

A simple configuration C for the example consists of: 

– One controller instance: UController = {c1}

– Three sensor instances: USensor = {sL, s R1, s R2}

– Set field interpretations: c1.leftSensors = {sL}, c1.rightSensors = {sR1, s R2},and c1.allSensors = {sL, s R1, s R2}

This configuration clearly satisfies the configuration constraints Γ .

A.3 Execution Scenario 

We illustrate a sample execution scenario over the above configuration C. Ini-tially, the controller c1 is in the Idle state, its direction is set to Stop , and 

executed is false . All sensors, namely sL, sR1, and sR2, are in the Ready state, each with executed set to false , and their processed event is false. The initial scheduler phase is Sense .For the external inputs, suppose that the left sensor detects an obstacle, i.e., 

sL.obstacle = true, while both right sensors detect no obstacle, so sR1.obstacle = false and sR2.obstacle = false. The execution proceeds in scheduler transitions. The first transition is the self-transition of the Sense phase, which execute the local transitions of all instances in the Sense phase. In particular, we have: 22 Cimatti et al. 

– Sensors: 

• sL detects an obstacle ( sL.obstacle = true), so it executes senseNoGo 

transition: Ready → NoGo 

• sR1 detects no obstacle ( sR1.obstacle = false), so it executes senseGo 

transition: Ready → Go 

• sR2 detects no obstacle ( sR2.obstacle = false), so it executes senseGo 

transition: Ready → Go 

– Controller: Stutters (no transitions in Sense phase) Moreover, each instance’s executed flag is set to true . Then, the next sched-uler transition is from Sense phase to Act phase, which updates the scheduler global phase and resets executed to false for all instances. This is followed by the Act phase self-transition, where again all instances execute their local transitions in the Act phase. For example, we have: 

– Controller: The controller c1 is in Idle state. It evaluates its transition guards for the local execution: 

• actRight guard: ( ∃s ∈ { sL} : s. location = NoGo ) ∧ (∀s ∈ { sR1, s R2} :

s. location = Go )

• This evaluates to: ( sL.location = NoGo )∧(sR1.location = Go ∧sR2.location = 

Go ), which is true in the current state. 

– Effect: Controller executes actRight :

• Sets c1.direction := Right 

• Moves to c1.location := Moving 

• Sets sL.processed := true, sR1.processed := true and sR2.processed := true 

– Sensors: Check for processed events: 

• sL has processed = true, executes resetNoGo : NoGo → Ready 

• sR1 has processed = true, executes resetGo : Go → Ready 

• sR2 has processed = true, executes resetGo : Go → Ready 

All sensors are back in Ready state and have their processed event reset to false. Note that if we had switched the execution order within the Act phase, the sensors would have stuttered, and the events would have remained true, triggering an additional act phase. Instead, we now take the scheduler transition from Act phase to Reset phase, followed by the Reset phase self-transition; here, only the controller has a transition: it executes reset transition: Moving 

→ Idle .At the end of Cycle 1, the controller has decided to move right and returned to Idle state. The direction variable retains the value Right . Before starting Cycle 2, the external inputs (sensor obstacle values) may change: we might start in a situation where the controller is moving right, and right sensors are detecting obstacles, forcing the controller to change direction at the end of cycle 2. Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 23 

A.4 Local Contracts 

We report an example for a valid local contract for the Controller ’s exec 

method in the Act phase. Let leftNoGo ≡ (∃s ∈ leftSensors . s. location =

NoGo ) and rightGo ≡ (∀s ∈ rightSensors . s. location = Go ). A valid postcon-dition capturing the actRight case is: 

TController (Act ) ≡  old (location ) = Idle ∧ old (leftNoGo ) ∧ old (rightGo )

∧  location = Moving ∧ direction = Right 

∧ (∀s ∈ All Sensor . s. processed = (if s ∈ allSensors then true 

else old (s. processed ))) 

∨ . . . (other transitions handled similarly) 

B Automatic Contract Generation 

B.1 Initialization Contract 

The initialization contract IC for a class C directly reflects the semantics of the 

init method. It is defined as a conjunction of equalities of the form v = e, where 

v is a field of the class and e is a constant expression. 

B.2 Execute contracts 

Contracts for exec methods are generated in three steps: (1) symbolic trans-formation of transition effects, (2) encoding of individual transitions, and (3) combination of the latter for the execution contract. 

Step 1: Symbolic transformation of transition effects. For each transition effect 

E, we compute a symbolic effect formula Effect E that captures the state update performed by executing E. This is done by forward symbolic execution, which computes a symbolic map ME associating each variable with an expression over pre-state values. Assignments update the corresponding map entry; condition-als yield conditional expressions; and quantified assignments generate lambda expressions for function fields. Method calls occurring in E are inlined by sub-stituting their bodies, so that the transformation operates on a single expanded statement sequence. A detailed description of this transformation is provided in Algorithm 1. It maintains a symbolic map M that tracks the cumulative effect of assignments, handling sequential composition by chaining updates. Given an effect E of a class C, the transformation initializes M0(v) = vold for each of the variables v

that are fields of C and are assigned to in the effect, and M0(f ) = λy.w old (y)for each variable w that is updated by a quantified assignment in the effect, then computes the final map ME = Transform (E, M 0). The Subst function substitutes all variable occurrences using the current symbolic map. 24 Cimatti et al. 

Algorithm 1 Effect Transformation: Transform (Statement S, Map M )

1: Input: Statement S, Symbolic map M

2: Output: Updated symbolic map M ′

3: 4: if S is v := e then 

5: M ′(v) ← Subst (e, M )6: M ′(w) ← M (w) for all w̸ = v

7: else if S is v := ∗ then 

8: M ′(v) ← ε ▷ havoc: no constraint on v

9: M ′(w) ← M (w) for all w̸ = v

10: else if S is if b then S1 else S2 then 

11: M1 ← Transform (S1, M )12: M2 ← Transform (S2, M )13: for each variable v do 

14: M ′(v) ← if Subst (b, M ) then M1(v) else M2(v)15: end for 

16: else if S is ∀x ∈ Eset {x.f := e} (quantified assignment) then 

17: M ′(f ) ← λy. if y ∈ Eset then Subst (e[x 7 → y], M ) else M (f )( y)18: M ′(w) ← M (w) for all w̸ = f

19: else if S is S1; S2 then 

20: Mtemp ← Transform (S1, M )21: M ′ ← Transform (S2, M temp )22: end if 

23: return M ′

The resulting effect formula is defined as: Effect E ≡ ^

> v∈modified(self)

v = ME (v)

∧ ^

> w∈modified(other)

∀x :: x ∈ All . x.w = ME (w),

where ME (v) and ME (w) are the symbolic expressions computed for fields of the current object and for fields of other objects accessed via set-valued references, respectively. 

Remark 1 (Strongest Postcondition). Existentially quantifying the pre-state vari-ables in Effect E yields a formula equivalent to the strongest postcondition of the effect E.

Step 2: Encoding of transitions. Each class transition t = ( lstart , G, l end , E, p ) is encoded as a transition formula Trans t:Trans t ≡ old (location = lstart ∧ bGt)

∧ Effect E ∧ location = lend 

∧ executed 

∧ ResetEvents (G) ∧ Unchanged .Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 25 

The predicate bGt is the extended guard , which enforces transition priority: 

bGt ≡ G ∧ ^

> t′≺t, t ′.start= lstart , t ′.end= lend

¬Gt′ .

Here t′ ≺ t indicates that transition t′ is declared before t in the class defi-nition. Since transitions are evaluated in declaration order, t may fire only if its own guard holds and all higher-priority guards with the same source and target locations are false. The remaining components of Trans t serve auxiliary purposes: 

– ResetEvents (G) resets to false any event fields referenced in the guard G;

– Unchanged is an expression asserting that all variables not modified by E

retain their pre-state values. 

Step 3: Execution Contracts. For a given phase p, the execution contract Exec pC

for class C is defined as the disjunction of all transition formulas associated with phase p, augmented with a stuttering case: 

Exec pC ≡ _

> t∈transitions( C)
> t. phase= p

Trans t ∨ Stutter .

The predicate Stutter asserts that all state variables remain unchanged and applies when no transition in phase p is enabled, i.e., when all corresponding guards are false. 

B.3 Tick Timer Contracts 

The tick-timer contract KC for a class C is also generated automatically. Its effect consists of decrementing all active timers declared in the class by one and updating the state of any timer that reaches zero (e.g., by marking it as 

inactive ). Also this expression can be derived trivially from the class definition. 

C Proof of Theorem 1 

Here we provide a proof of Theorem 1 (Compositional Soundness), clarifying the connection to the local contracts and global entailment checks in Section 4.2. 

Theorem 1 (Compositional Soundness). Given a configurable SRA system 

S, a set of configuration constraints Γ , and a global property φ, if all local contracts are valid and all global entailment checks in Section 4.2 succeed for an invariant Inv , then φ holds at the end of every scheduling cycle in every run of S, for all configurations satisfying Γ .26 Cimatti et al. 

Proof. Fix an arbitrary configuration C such that C | = Γ . We first prove that the invariant Inv holds in all reachable global states. We then use this fact to establish the safety property φ.

Invariant preservation. We proceed by induction on the length of a run, showing that for every reachable global state S, we have C, S |= Inv .

Base case. Let S0 be the initial global state produced by system initialization. For each instance o in C, the local state of o in S0 is a valid post-state of the init 

method. By validity of the initialization contracts, IC holds for all instances in 

S0.Moreover, by construction, S0(phase ) = l0 and all instances satisfy ¬executed .Hence S0 satisfies the antecedent of the initialization check (“Initialization es-tablishes Inv ”). By the validity of this check, we conclude C, S 0 |= Inv .

Inductive step. Assume that C, S |= Inv for some reachable global state S. Let 

S′ be any state reachable from S by one scheduler transition. We distinguish cases according to the form of the scheduler transition. 

Case 1: Scheduler self-loop. Suppose S(phase ) = p and the scheduler takes the self-loop p → p. This corresponds to an arbitrary interleaving of exec (p) invocations. We model this execution as a sequence 

S = σ0 → σ1 → · · · → σn = S′,

where each step σi → σi+1 corresponds to executing exec (p) on a single instance 

oi.We prove by induction on i that for all 0 ≤ i ≤ n:1. C, σ i |= Inv , and 2. for every instance c that has not yet executed in phase p at σi, C, σ i |= c.G ′.

Base case ( i = 0 ). By the outer induction hypothesis, C, S |= Inv . Since the self-loop is taken, S also satisfies the scheduler guard gp→p. By the self-loop preservation check, condition (a) (establishment of G′), we obtain C, σ 0 |= c.G ′

for all instances c. Thus both claims hold for σ0.

Inductive step. Assume the claims hold for σi, with i < n . The state σi+1 is obtained by executing exec (p) on instance oi and setting oi.executed to true .By validity of the local execution contract, exec (p) satisfies TC (p). Since the antecedent of the self-loop main preservation entailment holds at σi, its validity yields C, σ i+1 |= Inv .Moreover, for any instance c̸ = oi that has not yet executed in phase p, the self-loop preservation check, condition (b) (stability) applies, with d instantiated as oi. Thus C, σ i+1 |= c.G ′ holds for all such instances. This completes the inner induction, and therefore C, S ′ |= Inv holds after the self-loop. Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 27 

Case 2: Scheduler phase change. Suppose the scheduler transitions from phase 

p to phase p′ with guard gp→p′ . By the outer induction hypothesis, we have 

C, S |= Γ ∧ Inv ∧ phase = p ∧ gp→p′ .

We distinguish cases depending on the target location. 

Case 2a: Non-final transition ( p′̸ = lf ). In this case, S′ is obtained by updating the scheduler location to p′ and resetting all executed flags to false . Thus the antecedent of the phase-transition non-final entailment is satisfied. By its validity, we conclude 

C, S ′ |= Inv .

Case 2b: Final transition ( p′ = lf ). In this case, the scheduler transitions to the final location and additionally resets all executed flags to false and invokes 

tick on all instances. By validity of the local tick contracts, KC holds for all instances. Thus the antecedent of the phase-transition final entailment holds in 

S′. By its validity, we conclude 

C, S ′ |= Inv .

Case 2c: Reset transition ( lf → l0). Finally, suppose the scheduler transitions implicitly from the final location lf back to the initial location l0. By the outer induction hypothesis, we have 

C, S |= Γ ∧ Inv ∧ phase = lf .

By construction of the reset transition, external input variables may change, while all non-input fields remain unchanged. Thus S′ satisfies the predicate InputChange and phase = l0. The antecedent of the phase-transition reset en-tailment therefore holds. By its validity, we conclude 

C, S ′ |= Inv .

This completes the inductive proof that Inv holds in all reachable states. 

Establishing the safety property. Let Si be a global state at the end of a scheduling cycle, i.e., Si(phase ) = lf . By invariant preservation, C, S i |= Inv . Moreover, Si is obtained by a final scheduler transition. By the validity of the safety-implication check (“ Inv implies the safety property”), we conclude C, S i |= φ.Since the configuration C and the run were arbitrary, the claim follows. 

D Detailed Experiment Results 

For the Railway Protection System, Table 3 shows the full verification statistics for local contracts, and Table 4 the statistics for safety properties. In Table 4, properties 1–21 are the properties verified in [9], while properties 22–25 are new. For the Signal Control Logic, Table 5 shows the full verification statistics for local contracts. 28 Cimatti et al. 

Table 3: Verification statistics for local contracts of the RPS 

Version Class # Ass. Tot. time Tot. RC Exec. time Exec. RC Guard time Guard RC Eff. time Eff. RC List 1 88 1380s 2710.11M 7s 22.85M 1370s 2678.98M 1s 3.57M 2 102 1069s 2154.83M 6s 20.47M 1059s 2123.46M 2s 5.22M 3 155 1036s 2229.82M 11s 33.91M 1020s 2181.6M 2s 6.83M 4 73 3s 7.94M 1s 2.0M 0s 0.46M 1s 2.5M 5 31 1s 1.13M 0s 0.13M 0s 0.01M 0s 0.17M 6 128 14s 48.75M 3s 11.71M 0s 0.5M 9s 31.99M 7 415 730s 2283.95M 322s 633.21M 15s 49.47M 381s 1567.6M Sum 994 4233s 9436.56M 350s 724.29M 3465s 7034.48M 396s 1617.89M List+QG 1 88 26s 78.58M 7s 20.68M 16s 50.87M 1s 3.38M 2 102 22s 72.42M 6s 18.95M 13s 44.03M 2s 5.02M 3 155 29s 84.4M 10s 28.54M 15s 43.23M 2s 6.62M 4 73 3s 6.6M 0s 1.65M 0s 0.2M 1s 2.4M 5 31 1s 1.13M 0s 0.13M 0s 0.01M 0s 0.17M 6 128 13s 48.75M 4s 11.71M 0s 0.5M 8s 31.99M 7 419 831s 2237.63M 377s 590.09M 16s 49.57M 427s 1567.6M Sum 998 925s 2529.53M 403s 671.75M 60s 188.41M 442s 1617.18M Set 1 84 44s 117.62M 39s 105.98M 1s 3.59M 1s 3.4M 2 98 43s 113.23M 39s 98.74M 1s 3.85M 2s 5.04M 3 148 59s 144.85M 52s 125.79M 1s 5.0M 2s 6.62M 4 69 3s 7.53M 1s 1.91M 0s 0.29M 1s 2.41M 5 29 1s 1.12M 0s 0.14M 0s 0.0M 0s 0.17M 6 126 13s 47.73M 3s 12.06M 0s 0.45M 8s 30.73M 7 407 565s 1721.96M 211s 330.57M 3s 8.2M 342s 1353.57M Sum 963 729s 2154.06M 345s 675.18M 7s 21.37M 356s 1401.94M Set+QG 1 84 5s 13.87M 2s 5.64M 1s 1.3M 1s 3.34M 2 98 6s 17.91M 2s 7.11M 1s 1.49M 2s 4.98M 3 148 9s 26.83M 4s 12.38M 1s 1.89M 2s 6.54M 4 69 2s 6.34M 0s 1.49M 0s 0.18M 1s 2.36M 5 29 1s 1.12M 0s 0.14M 0s 0.0M 0s 0.17M 6 126 13s 47.73M 3s 12.06M 0s 0.45M 8s 30.73M 7 407 584s 1738.14M 223s 349.33M 3s 8.4M 348s 1353.57M Sum 963 620s 1851.96M 234s 388.14M 5s 13.7M 362s 1401.69M 

Table 4: Verification statistics for safety properties of the RPS 

Prop. 

List List+QG Set Set+QG 

Trans. Exec. Trans. Exec. Trans. Exec. Trans. Exec. Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC Time RC 1 475s 1458M 15s 44M 356s 856M 18s 40M 388s 991M 24s 59M 195s 480M 18s 40M 2 576s 1399M 18s 47M 333s 792M 17s 38M 379s 959M 24s 58M 215s 555M 17s 36M 3 1641s 4394M 80s 200M 161s 383M 61s 143M 1412s 4078M 91s 215M 144s 381M 59s 126M 4 579s 1368M 20s 58M 370s 863M 14s 28M 357s 888M 22s 52M 237s 528M 15s 32M 5 564s 1349M 19s 56M 351s 788M 13s 26M 381s 881M 20s 48M 205s 473M 15s 33M 6 596s 1412M 17s 43M 361s 827M 15s 29M 402s 931M 23s 56M 232s 511M 15s 31M 7 568s 1346M 21s 61M 347s 854M 11s 27M 391s 866M 23s 59M 238s 539M 18s 46M 8 567s 1348M 17s 45M 341s 851M 13s 32M 428s 1018M 21s 53M 213s 480M 16s 35M 9 562s 1315M 18s 50M 293s 728M 12s 29M 382s 886M 20s 48M 236s 524M 20s 49M 10 425s 1030M 20s 48M 312s 794M 11s 33M 308s 755M 21s 52M 164s 398M 20s 42M 11 403s 1004M 18s 50M 250s 650M 12s 29M 288s 722M 20s 49M 136s 340M 16s 34M 12 398s 987M 17s 45M 308s 796M 13s 33M 300s 750M 21s 49M 133s 323M 16s 35M 13 606s 1498M 18s 45M 303s 770M 16s 43M 332s 856M 24s 59M 184s 448M 20s 43M 14 550s 1260M 19s 49M 321s 819M 15s 39M 320s 798M 25s 60M 210s 523M 17s 37M 15 2224s 5580M 98s 233M 161s 405M 42s 106M 1592s 4490M 90s 209M 135s 348M 43s 96M 16 668s 1554M 18s 46M 305s 769M 16s 41M 331s 834M 22s 51M 177s 448M 16s 43M 17 563s 1276M 19s 48M 327s 818M 15s 38M 292s 774M 32s 75M 208s 523M 14s 37M 18 1750s 4534M 116s 277M 148s 402M 72s 188M 1703s 4460M 92s 226M 133s 343M 43s 115M 19 580s 1362M 18s 45M 270s 743M 17s 39M 305s 813M 24s 60M 208s 532M 13s 37M 20 502s 1406M 20s 44M 265s 723M 17s 37M 314s 816M 23s 57M 188s 472M 13s 38M 21 1472s 4386M 101s 249M 143s 379M 54s 117M 1851s 4866M 84s 196M 147s 383M 50s 134M 22 108s 319M 13s 29M 43s 124M 9s 16M 110s 334M 13s 29M 39s 127M 6s 16M 23 110s 319M 11s 29M 43s 124M 9s 16M 108s 334M 13s 30M 40s 127M 6s 18M 24 108s 319M 11s 29M 42s 124M 10s 16M 109s 334M 14s 31M 39s 127M 6s 16M 25 111s 319M 12s 29M 42s 124M 9s 16M 107s 334M 12s 28M 41s 127M 7s 18M Sum 16708s 42544M 755s 1899M 6195s 15508M 514s 1195M 12888s 33769M 797s 1908M 4096s 10064M 497s 1187M Max 2224s 5580M 116s 277M 370s 863M 72s 188M 1851s 4866M 92s 226M 238s 555M 59s 134M Verification of Configurable SRA Systems: Extended Version 29 

Table 5: Verification statistics summary for local contracts of the SCL 

Version Class # Ass. Tot. time Tot. RC Exec. time Exec. RC Guard time Guard RC Eff. time Eff. RC List 1 32 7s 24.51M 0s 1.11M 0s 0.03M 6s 22.02M 2 196 305s 1030.73M 22s 73.94M 1s 1.32M 279s 946.44M 3 40 7s 28.08M 0s 0.82M 0s 0.25M 6s 25.46M 4 135 682s 2730.86M 74s 270.51M 0s 0.8M 605s 2452.96M Sum 408 1001s 3814.77M 97s 346.38M 1s 2.4M 895s 3446.88M List+QG 1 32 7s 24.96M 0s 1.39M 0s 0.03M 6s 22.25M 2 198 305s 1022.16M 24s 67.43M 1s 0.92M 277s 944.87M 3 40 7s 27.75M 0s 0.77M 0s 0.1M 6s 25.46M 4 136 605s 2453.57M 6s 20.78M 0s 0.56M 597s 2426.29M Sum 411 924s 3528.9M 31s 90.37M 1s 1.6M 886s 3418.88M Set 1 30 6s 23.67M 0s 0.92M 0s 0.02M 5s 21.41M 2 193 298s 1030.77M 19s 75.98M 1s 1.04M 275s 944.86M 3 38 7s 27.95M 0s 0.81M 0s 0.15M 6s 25.46M 4 133 658s 2680.7M 62s 239.7M 0s 0.7M 593s 2434.0M Sum 399 969s 3763.57M 82s 317.41M 1s 1.91M 880s 3425.74M Set+QG 1 30 6s 23.65M 0s 0.97M 0s 0.02M 5s 21.41M 2 193 295s 1016.75M 17s 62.5M 1s 0.87M 275s 944.59M 3 38 7s 27.73M 0s 0.77M 0s 0.08M 6s 25.46M 4 133 601s 2450.14M 5s 16.2M 0s 0.53M 594s 2427.32M Sum 399 910s 3518.73M 22s 80.44M 1s 1.5M 880s 3418.78M