Rtl2lean: Automated RTL-to-Lean Translation with
Hierarchical Theorem Generation and Lemma Reuse
Hongqin Lyu1,2, Junxing Dong3, Yonghao Wang1 Zhiteng Chao1, Tiancheng Wang1,2 and Huawei Li1,2
1State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
2University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3NorthChina University of Science and Technology
Abstract—Formal verification with interactive theorem provers
can provide strong correctness guarantees for register transfer
level designs, but applying it to existing SystemVerilog code
requires substantial manual effort in semantic modeling and
proof construction. This paper presents Rtl2lean, a framework
that automatically translates RTL designs into executable Lean
4 models and builds a hierarchical theorem library for subse-
quent verification. The generated model represents hardware
execution as a pure state transition function, while a four layer
theorem framework captures combinational semantics, sequential
updates, single cycle behavior, and reachability and invariants.
When a high level property cannot be discharged by the existing
theorem base, an LLM based proving loop proposes intermediate
lemmas from the current proof context and Lean feedback. Only
lemmas accepted by the Lean kernel are added to the reusable
lemma pool. Experiments on six SystemVerilog designs generate
403 theorems, all of which are successfully checked by Lean.
Among 358 foundational lemmas, 287 are available for automatic
reuse, yielding a reusable lemma ratio of 80.2 percent. The results
demonstrate that Rtl2lean can construct machine checked RTL
proof libraries with low checking overhead and substantial cross
property lemma reuse.
Index Terms—RTL verification, Lean 4, theorem proving,
lemma generation, large language models
I. INTRODUCTION
As integrated circuits continue to grow in scale and com-
plexity, register-transfer level (RTL) verification has become
one of the most critical and costly stages in modern hardware
development [1]. Processors and system-on-chip designs often
contain complex datapaths, control state machines, pipelined
structures, and a large number of parameterized modules. Even
a minor error, such as a missing state transition, an unhandled
boundary condition, or an incorrect bit-vector operation, may
remain undetected until system integration or even after tape-
out, leading to substantial debugging and repair costs. There-
fore, establishing rigorous and scalable correctness guarantees
for RTL designs at an early stage is a central challenge in
hardware design automation.
Existing RTL verification flows mainly rely on dynamic
simulation, model checking, equivalence checking, and formal
verification based on SAT/SMT solvers. Simulation is practical
and scalable for engineering use, but it can examine only a
finite set of input vectors and execution traces. Model checking
and bounded model checking can automatically explore the
state space and have been widely used for both hardware
and software verification [2], [3]. However, as the number of
registers, pipeline depth, and overall state space increase, the
solving process is often limited by state explosion and the
rapid growth of constraints [4].
Unlike automated model checking, which relies on explor-
ing a finite state space, interactive theorem provers such as
Lean 4 and Coq allow users to define hardware semantics
in formal logic and construct machine-checked proofs that
hold for arbitrary inputs and execution lengths. Lean 4 further
provides dependent types, extensible metaprogramming, and
efficient code generation, making it suitable both for express-
ing RTL designs and their properties and for building domain-
specific proof automation [5]. Prior work such as Kami and
Silver Oak has shown that embedding hardware semantics
in proof assistants can support modular and parameterized
verification while providing stronger correctness guarantees
than finite simulation and bounded checking [6], [7]. However,
applying this approach to existing RTL designs remains costly.
The event-driven semantics of the verilog differ substantially
from Lean’s reasoning model [8] based on pure functions and
type theory, while proofs of complex hardware properties often
require manually constructed auxiliary definitions, invariants,
and intermediate lemmas.
Fortunately, large language models (LLMs) have recently
demonstrated strong heuristic reasoning capabilities in both
code generation and formal theorem proving. Early work
such as GPT-f showed that generative language models can
be used to predict formal proof steps [9]. LeanDojo further
introduced infrastructure for interacting with the Lean proof
environment, extracting proof data, and retrieving relevant
premises, and demonstrated that retrieval-based premise se-
lection can improve automated theorem proving [10]. In the
hardware domain, the recent CktFormalizer [11] framework
translates natural-language hardware specifications into type-
safe hardware descriptions embedded in Lean 4, and uses
Lean for compilation checking and functional equivalence
proofs. Together, these studies suggest that LLMs can identify
promising reasoning steps from the current proof state and
existing proof libraries, thereby assisting theorem provers in
proof search.
However, this paper focuses on a different yet complemen-
tary question: Can existing RTL designs be automatically
translated into a Lean 4 formal library, while large lan-
guage models dynamically generate intermediate lemmas
to improve the automation of RTL theorem proving?
arXiv:2607.16855v1  [cs.AR]  18 Jul 2026


Achieving this goal involves two main challenges. First, there
is currently no tool that can automatically translate RTL
into Lean 4 representations. Because RTL behavior is jointly
determined by current inputs, register states, and combina-
tional and sequential logic, the resulting Lean model must
hide unnecessary Verilog execution details while faithfully
preserving the cycle-level semantics of the original design.
Second, proofs of complex RTL properties often rely on highly
design-specific intermediate lemmas, such as state invariants,
bit-vector properties, and multi-cycle relations. These lemmas
are difficult to enumerate in advance and are also challenging
for existing proof automation techniques to generate directly.
To address these challenges, we propose Rtl2lean, an LLM-
assisted Lean 4 formal verification framework for RTL de-
signs. First, we develop a lightweight RTL-to-Lean 4 compiler
that translates combinational logic, state updates, and bit-
vector operations into Lean definitions with explicit cycle-
level semantics, providing a unified representation for formally
specifying and proving RTL properties. Second, we integrate
an LLM into Lean’s interactive proof loop. When a proof
attempt fails, the framework collects the current proof goal,
relevant definitions, and error feedback, and uses the LLM
to generate candidate intermediate lemmas. Each generated
lemma must be verified by the Lean kernel before it can be
used to advance the proof.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
1) An automated RTL-to-Lean translation flow is proposed
to convert combinational logic, sequential state updates,
and fixed-width bit-vector operations into Lean defini-
tions with explicit cycle-level semantics.
2) An LLM-assisted theorem proving mechanism is intro-
duced to generate intermediate lemmas from the cur-
rent proof goal, local context, and Lean error feedback
through an iterative generate–check–repair process.
3) Experiments on six SystemVerilog designs demonstrate
a 100 percent proof success rate and an 80.2 percent
reusable lemma ratio.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Interactive Theorem Proving
The goal of theorem proving is to establish that a propo-
sition follows from a set of formally specified assumptions
through valid logical inference. Let Γ denote a logical context
containing variables, assumptions, definitions, and previously
proved results, and let P denote the proposition to be proved.
A proof task can be written as
Γ ⊢P,
(1)
where ⊢indicates that P can be derived from the information
contained in Γ using valid inference rules. A formal proof is
therefore a sequence of logically valid steps that transforms the
initial goal into propositions that can be directly established
from the context.
Lean 4 is an interactive theorem prover based on dependent
type theory and the propositions-as-types principle. Under
this principle, a proposition is represented as a type, while
a proof of that proposition is represented as a term of the
corresponding type. Proving a proposition P is therefore
equivalent to constructing a proof term p such that
Γ ⊢p : P.
(2)
The Lean kernel checks whether the constructed term indeed
has type P. A theorem is accepted only if its proof term passes
kernel type checking.
B. Definitions, Theorems, and Intermediate Lemmas
A formal development is primarily composed of definitions,
theorems, and lemmas. Definitions specify the objects being
reasoned about and their formal semantics. Theorems express
the final correctness properties to be established, while lemmas
capture intermediate results that can be reused during the
proof.
Let T be the target theorem. When directly proving T is
difficult, the proof can be decomposed by first establishing a
set of intermediate lemmas,
L1, L2, . . . , Ln,
(3)
and then using them to derive the final result:
Γ ⊢L1,
Γ ⊢L2,
. . . ,
Γ ⊢Ln,
(4)
Γ, L1, L2, . . . , Ln ⊢T.
(5)
Intermediate lemmas do not alter the meaning of the target
theorem. Instead, they expose auxiliary properties required
by the proof and decompose a complex reasoning task into
smaller logical obligations.
III. FRAMEWORK OF RTL2LEAN
Before presenting the technical details, we first introduce
the overall workflow of rtl2lean, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The
framework consists of three stages.
1) RTL-to-Lean
semantic
compilation:
translates
Sys-
temVerilog RTL into a pure functional state-transition
model in Lean 4
2) Theorem framework generation: constructs a four-layer
proof skeleton covering combinational logic, sequential
processes, single-cycle behavior, and reachability or
invariants.
3) Autonomous proving with lemma reuse: proves high-
level specifications through a Lean-guided feedback
loop and stores verified theorems in a lemma pool for
subsequent proof tasks.
A. RTL-to-Lean Semantic Compilation
SystemVerilog combines width-sensitive operations, block-
ing and non-blocking assignments, conditional control flow,
and distinct combinational and sequential processes, making a
direct encoding into a theorem prover difficult to reason about.
To address this issue, rtl2lean first parses the RTL design
with PySlang and constructs a typed abstract syntax tree.
The resulting syntax tree is then lowered into an intermediate


Fig. 1. RTL2LEAN framework.
representation, where conditional updates are normalized as
selection expressions and different assignment types retain
their corresponding update semantics. After standard optimiza-
tions, such as constant folding, dead-code elimination, and
common-subexpression elimination, the backend generates a
Lean 4 model consisting of State, Inputs, Outputs, and
a single-cycle transition function step.
The generated model represents hardware execution as a
pure function. Given the current state s and input i, step(s, i)
returns the next state without side effects. For example, the
behavior of a counter with reset and enable signals can be
abstracted as
step(s, i) =





init,
i.rst = true,
s[count ←s.count + 1],
i.enable = true,
s,
otherwise.
(6)
This functional encoding preserves the cycle-level transition
semantics of the RTL design while exposing an explicit state
relation on which subsequent theorems can be constructed.
B. Four-Layer Theorem Framework Generation
Although RTL-to-Lean compilation establishes an exe-
cutable formal semantics for the design, directly proving high-
level specifications may still require repeated unfolding of
combinational functions, sequential processes, and the single-
cycle transition function. Such proofs quickly become verbose
and contain substantial redundant reasoning. To address this
issue, rtl2lean automatically constructs a bottom-up four-layer
theorem framework from the generated Lean 4 model. Lower
layers capture local hardware semantics, while higher layers
reuse these results to establish cycle-level and multi-cycle
properties.
1) Combinational-Logic Lemmas: The first layer targets
functions generated from continuous assignments and com-
binational processes. For each combinational function, the
framework generates semantic lemmas for updated fields and
preservation lemmas for unaffected fields. As illustrated in
Fig. 2(a), the semantic lemma characterizes how the overflow
flag is computed, while the preservation lemma states that
the counter register remains unchanged. The preservation
lemma is marked with Lean’s @[simp] attribute, allowing
the simplifier to apply it automatically in subsequent proofs.
2) Sequential-Block Lemmas:
The second layer targets
state-update functions generated from sequential processes
such as always_ff. For each sequential function, the frame-
work derives determinism lemmas, preservation lemmas for
registers outside its write set, and reset-behavior lemmas when
a reset pattern is identified. Figure 2(b) shows a counter
update, its functional determinism property, and preservation
of an unwritten overflow register. These lemmas package
register-level behavior into reusable proof units and avoid
repeatedly unfolding the complete sequential function.
3) Step-Level Theorems: The third layer is built around the
unified single-cycle transition function step, which combines
reset handling, combinational evaluation, and sequential state
updates. This layer captures module-level properties such as
reset behavior, transition determinism, output reflection, and
finite-state machine transitions. In Fig. 2(c), reset assertion
forces the next state to equal the initial state, while an output-
reflection lemma relates the externally observed count value
to the corresponding internal register. Step-level theorems
therefore provide a direct interface for reasoning about the
complete behavior of one hardware cycle.
4) Reachability and Invariants:
The first three layers
characterize individual functions or a single transition step,
whereas many hardware specifications concern executions of
arbitrary length. The fourth layer therefore introduces reacha-
bility to lift the single-cycle semantics of step to multi-cycle
executions. As shown in Fig. 2(d), a state is reachable if it can
be obtained from the initial state by folding step over a finite
input sequence. The framework then proves that reachability
is preserved by one additional transition and introduces state
invariants over all reachable states. Such results provide an
induction basis for proving higher-level safety and functional
specifications.


Fig. 2. Representative examples generated by the four-layer.
C. Autonomous Proving and Lemma Reuse
The previous stages generate an executable Lean 4 model
and a layered theorem base. However, high-level functional
specifications often require design-specific intermediate results
that cannot be derived by fixed proof templates alone. To ad-
dress this issue, Rtl2lean employs a Lean-guided autonomous
proving procedure. When the existing theorem base cannot
discharge the current goal, an LLM generates candidate in-
termediate lemmas from the proof context and Lean error
feedback. Only candidates accepted by the Lean kernel are
added to the lemma pool and reused in subsequent proof tasks.
1) Proof-Task Construction: For each high-level specifi-
cation, the system first creates a Lean theorem with an
incomplete proof and collects the relevant context, including
the generated state definitions, transition functions, four-layer
theorem base, and verified lemmas stored in the lemma pool.
For a target theorem T, the proof context is represented as
C(T) = (M, T, Lbase, Lpool) ,
(7)
where M denotes the generated Lean 4 model, Lbase is the
set of automatically generated lower-layer lemmas, and Lpool
contains reusable lemmas proved in earlier tasks.
For example, a high-level property for the counter states that
the register remains unchanged when neither reset nor enable
is asserted:
i.rst = false∧i.enable = false =⇒step(s, i).count = s.count.
(8)
The system provides this target together with the definition of
step, the sequential-update semantics, and relevant preserva-
tion lemmas.
2) Lean-Guided Proving and Lemma Reuse: Given the
constructed proof task, the system first attempts to solve the
target using the existing theorem base. If the proof remains
incomplete, an LLM proposes candidate intermediate lemmas
according to the current goal, relevant definitions, available
lemmas, and Lean error messages. Each candidate is checked
by the Lean kernel before use. Rejected candidates are returned
to the LLM with diagnostic feedback, whereas accepted lem-
mas are added to the lemma pool and used to continue the
proof. The iterative process is expressed as
pk+1 = Generate
 C(T), ek

,
(9)
where pk is the k-th candidate proof and ek is the error
returned by Lean. The loop terminates when
Check(T, pk) = Pass.
(10)
After a successful proof, the lemma pool is updated as
Lk+1 = Lk ∪{T} ∪H,
(11)
where H denotes auxiliary lemmas or local have statements
discovered during proof generation. Later proofs can reuse
these results through tactics such as rw, apply, and simp,
avoiding repeated unfolding of the underlying RTL semantics.
For the counter property in Eq. (8), a valid proof can be
written as
theorem count_stable_when_disabled :
forall (s : counterState) (i : counterInputs),
i.rst = false ->
i.enable = false ->
(step s i).count = s.count := by
intro s i hrst hen
simp [step, proc_alwaysff, hrst, hen]
Once verified, this theorem can be reused to prove related
properties, such as the stability of the corresponding output
value.
IV. EXPERMENTAL
A. Expermental set
To evaluate the effectiveness of Rtl2lean in RTL for-
mal modeling, theorem generation, and Lean-based machine
checking, we select six SystemVerilog designs with diverse
functional and structural characteristics from OpenCores [12],


TABLE I
OPENCORES RTL DESIGNS USED IN THE EXPERIMENTS
Design
Main Function
debounce_edge
Debouncing and edge detection
fir_filter
Finite impulse response filtering
pwm_generator
Pulse-width modulation
lfsr_crc
LFSR and CRC computation
sync_fifo
Synchronous FIFO buffering
ps2_keyboard
PS/2 keyboard control
as shown in Table I. This benchmark suite enables the ap-
plicability of Rtl2lean to be evaluated across different design
types and hardware structures. To validate the effectiveness
of the proposed method, Lean 4.26 [13] is used to check the
Lean models, foundational lemmas, and high-level properties
generated by Rtl2lean. All experiments are conducted on a
server equipped with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6148 CPU
and 629 GB of RAM.
B. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the proof-generation capability, correctness,
execution efficiency, and lemma reusability of Rtl2lean, we
adopt the metrics summarized in Table II. The total number
of theorems, denoted by Ntotal, measures the overall scale
of the formal verification artifacts generated and checked
by Lean. The number of high-level properties, denoted by
Nproperty, indicates the number of RTL functional and state-
related properties verified by the framework. The number of
foundational lemmas, denoted by Nlemma, characterizes the
size of the supporting proof library automatically generated
for proving these high-level properties.
The proof success rate measures the proportion of generated
theorems that are successfully accepted by Lean and is defined
as
Proof Success Rate = Nproved
Ntotal
× 100%,
(12)
where Nproved denotes the number of theorems successfully
checked by Lean, and Ntotal denotes the total number of
generated theorems. We additionally report the numbers of
errors, unresolved goals, and proofs containing sorry to
identify incomplete verification results.
For efficiency evaluation, we report the end-to-end exe-
cution time, denoted by Te2e, and the Lean checking time,
denoted by TLean. The former measures the total time for RTL
translation, theorem and lemma generation, proof construction,
and result collection, while the latter measures the time
required by Lean to check the generated proof files. We also
evaluate the automatic reusability of foundational lemmas by
defining the reusable lemma ratio as
Rreuse = Nreusable
Nlemma
× 100%,
(13)
where Nreusable denotes the number of foundational lemmas
that can be automatically applied in subsequent proofs, and
Nlemma denotes the total number of foundational lemmas.
TABLE II
EVALUATION METRICS FOR RTL2LEAN
Metric
Symbol
Total theorems
Ntotal
High-level properties
Nproperty
Foundational lemmas
Nlemma
Proof success rate
Rproof
End-to-end time
Te2e
Lean checking time
TLean
Reusable lemma ratio
Rreuse
C. Proof Results and Lemma Reuse Analysis
Table III presents the proof results and lemma reuse statis-
tics of Rtl2lean on the six RTL designs. Rtl2lean generates
and verifies a total of 403 theorems, including 45 high-
level properties and 358 foundational lemmas. Among the
foundational lemmas, 287 can be automatically reused in
subsequent proofs. All generated theorems are successfully
checked by Lean, resulting in a proof success rate of 100%
for every design.
As shown in Table III, the number of high-level properties
remains relatively stable across the evaluated designs, ranging
from seven to eight, whereas the number of foundational
lemmas varies considerably, from 22 for fir_filter to
86 for sync_fifo. This difference indicates that the size
of the foundational proof library is mainly affected by the
complexity of state variables, assignment operations, and state-
update dependencies, rather than solely by the number of high-
level properties. In particular, sync_fifo contains more
state and control relations and therefore produces the largest
number of foundational lemmas and total theorems.
All six designs achieve a proof success rate of 100%,
demonstrating that the Lean models and proofs generated by
Rtl2lean can be successfully machine-checked across designs
with different functions and structures. The overall reusable
lemma ratio reaches 80.2%, with five designs exceeding 77%,
indicating that most foundational lemmas can be reused in
subsequent high-level proofs to reduce repeated reasoning
over low-level assignment and state-update semantics. This
result also validates the effectiveness of Rtl2lean’s hierarchical
proof structure, in which foundational semantic relations are
proved once and then shared across multiple properties. Note
that Rreuse measures the proportion of lemmas available for
automatic reuse rather than their exact dynamic usage in
individual proofs.
D. Time Overhead
We measure the end-to-end execution time, Te2e, and the
Lean checking time, TLean. The former includes RTL transla-
tion, theorem and lemma generation, proof construction, and
result collection, while the latter measures the time required
by Lean to check the generated proof files. Table IV reports
the checking time for each design.
The complete proof-generation pipeline takes only Te2e =
0.650 s for all six designs, since the deterministic proof


TABLE III
PROOF RESULTS AND LEMMA REUSE STATISTICS OF RTL2LEAN
Design
Nproperty
Nlemma
Nreusable
Ntotal
Rproof
Rreuse
debounce_edge
8
71
56
79
100%
78.9%
fir_filter
7
22
14
29
100%
63.6%
pwm_generator
7
74
62
81
100%
83.8%
lfsr_crc
7
35
27
42
100%
77.1%
sync_fifo
8
86
70
94
100%
81.4%
ps2_keyboard
8
70
58
78
100%
82.9%
Total
45
358
287
403
100%
80.2%
TABLE IV
TIME OVERHEAD OF RTL2LEAN
Design
Ntotal
TLean (s)
debounce_edge
79
1.113
fir_filter
29
0.558
pwm_generator
81
0.918
lfsr_crc
42
0.721
sync_fifo
94
0.936
ps2_keyboard
78
1.327
Total
403
5.573
templates require neither proof search nor external model calls.
In comparison, Lean checking takes 5.573 s in total, indicating
that most of the time is spent on definition reduction and proof-
term checking. Each design is checked in less than 1.4 s,
including sync_fifo, which contains the largest number
of theorems. However, TLean is not strictly proportional to
Ntotal; for example, ps2_keyboard requires more checking
time than sync_fifo despite containing fewer theorems.
This suggests that checking cost is also influenced by the
complexity of state-transition logic and bit-vector expressions.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presents Rtl2lean, a framework that translates
SystemVerilog RTL into executable Lean 4 models, generates
a hierarchical theorem library, and supports high-level veri-
fication through LLM-assisted lemma generation and Lean-
checked lemma reuse. Experiments on six RTL designs pro-
duce 403 machine-checked theorems with a 100 percent proof
success rate and an 80.2 percent reusable lemma ratio. These
results demonstrate the potential of combining automated RTL
translation, structured theorem generation, and kernel-checked
LLM assistance for scalable hardware verification.
REFERENCES
[1] H. D. Foster, “Trends in functional verification: A 2014 industry study,”
in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Design Automation Conference, ser.
DAC ’15. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2015, pp. 48:1–48:6.
[2] E. M. Clarke, T. A. Henzinger, H. Veith, and R. Bloem, Eds., Handbook
of Model Checking.
Cham: Springer, 2018.
[3] A. Biere, A. Cimatti, E. M. Clarke, and Y. Zhu, “Symbolic model
checking without BDDs,” in Tools and Algorithms for the Construction
and Analysis of Systems, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, W. R.
Cleaveland, Ed., vol. 1579.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 1999, pp.
193–207.
[4] E. M. Clarke, W. Klieber, M. Nov´aˇcek, and P. Zuliani, “Model checking
and the state explosion problem,” in Tools for Practical Software
Verification, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, B. Meyer and
M. Nordio, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2012, vol. 7682, pp.
1–30.
[5] L. de Moura and S. Ullrich, “The Lean 4 theorem prover and pro-
gramming language,” in Automated Deduction – CADE 28, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, A. Platzer and G. Sutcliffe, Eds., vol. 12699.
Cham: Springer, 2021, pp. 625–635.
[6] J. Choi, M. Vijayaraghavan, B. Sherman, A. Chlipala, and Arvind,
“Kami: A platform for high-level parametric hardware specification and
its modular verification,” Proceedings of the ACM on Programming
Languages, vol. 1, no. ICFP, pp. 24:1–24:30, 2017.
[7] Project Oak, “Silver Oak: Formal specification and verification of hard-
ware,” https://project-oak.github.io/silveroak/, accessed: 2026-07-17.
[8] IEEE, “IEEE Standard for SystemVerilog—Unified Hardware Design,
Specification, and Verification Language,” Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, New York, NY, USA, IEEE Standard IEEE Std
1800-2023, Feb. 2024, revision of IEEE Std 1800-2017.
[9] S. Polu and I. Sutskever, “Generative language modeling for automated
theorem proving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.
[10] K. Yang, A. M. Swope, A. Gu, R. Chalamala, P. Song, S. Yu, S. Godil,
R. J. Prenger, and A. Anandkumar, “LeanDojo: Theorem proving with
retrieval-augmented language models,” in Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, vol. 36.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2023, pp.
21 573–21 612.
[11] J. Xiong, Q. Han, C. Ding, H. Xiao, Z. Su, C. Tao, and N. Wong,
“CktFormalizer: Autoformalization of natural language into circuit rep-
resentations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.07782, 2026.
[12] OpenCores, “OpenCores: Free and open-source gateware IP cores,”
https://opencores.org/, online resource, accessed July 18, 2026.
[13] Lean
FRO,
“Lean
4.26.0
release
notes,”
https://lean-
lang.org/doc/reference/latest/releases/v4.26.0/,
Dec.
2025,
released
December 13, 2025; accessed July 18, 2026.
