BTOR2-Based C Program Verification via
Hardware Model Checking
Xinyu Zhang, Runxuan Fang, Ziqun Bao, Yechuan Xia, Jianwen Li*, and Geguang Pu
East China Normal University
{westtide,rxfang,52285902029}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
{xiaozi465,lijwen2748}@gmail.com, ggpu@sei.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract—Program verification tools often rely on specific
intermediate representations and analysis backends, limiting
the reuse of verification algorithms and model checkers across
frameworks. In contrast, hardware model checking has developed
a mature backend ecosystem, where standard formats such as
BTOR2 support reusable algorithms for counterexample search
and inductive safety proving. Applying these capabilities to C
requires translating assertion-based programs into transition
systems that hardware model checkers can directly process.
We present C2Btor, a method for encoding such verification
tasks into BTOR2 models. C2Btor uses a program counter to
capture control transfers, represents data states and memory
objects with bit-vectors and arrays, and maps assumptions
and assertion checks into BTOR2 constraints and bad-state
properties.
We evaluate C2Btor on SV-COMP C ReachSafety benchmarks
and a curated assertion-category benchmark suite, comparing it
with representative program verification tools. C2Btor correctly
solves 263 tasks, 101 more than CBMC configured with bounded
model checking, and is especially effective on bit-vector bench-
marks, where it solves 75.5% of the tasks with no wrong verdicts.
These results show that the BTOR2 route allows C program
verification to benefit from advances in hardware model-checking
backends, expanding the available capability for counterexample
search, inductive safety proving, and word-level transition-system
reasoning.
Index Terms—Program Verification, BTOR2, Model Checking,
Intermediate Representation
I. Introduction
Hardware model checking has developed a mature ecosys-
tem of automated backends for Reachability-safety analysis.
Through competitions such as the Hardware Model Checking
Competition (HWMCC) [1], formats such as AIGER [2] and
BTOR2 [3] have become stable interfaces, enabling algorithms
such as Bounded Model Checking (BMC) [4], k-Induction [5],
and IC3/PDR [6, 7] to be implemented and reused over
common inputs. Although these techniques were developed
mainly for hardware transition systems, C program verification
has a closely related safety objective: a program is unsafe if
some feasible execution reaches an assertion failure, and safe
otherwise. This raises a natural question: Can C reachability-
safety tasks benefit from the mature automated backends
developed in hardware model checking?
C program verification already has mature intermediate
representations and tool ecosystems, as reflected in SV-
COMP [8]. Representations such as LLVM-IR [9], Constrained
Horn Clauses (CHCs) [10], and SMT-LIB [11] have supported
symbolic execution [12], abstract interpretation [13], bounded
model checking, and Horn-clause solving [14]. However, these
representations are not the task formats directly consumed
by HWMCC-style hardware model checkers. The issue is
therefore not the absence of software-verification IRs, but
the lack of a semantic encoding layer from assertion-based
C verification tasks to hardware model-checking transition
systems.
This paper addresses this gap by using BTOR2 as
the primary target representation. The reason is not that
BTOR2 replaces lower-level formats such as AIGER, but that
it provides a suitable interface for constructing program-level
transition systems before optional lowering to bit-level models.
BTOR2 preserves word-level bit-vector and array terms, and
provides native constructs for states, transitions, constraints,
and bad-state properties. These features allow the encoding to
keep finite-state program data, control-flow locations, assump-
tions, and assertion failures explicit in the generated model.
AIGER remains useful as a lower-level target for the subset
of generated models that can be bit-blasted and discharged by
AIGER-based engines.
We therefore propose C2Btor, a framework that trans-
lates C programs into BTOR2 transition systems and veri-
fies the generated tasks using hardware model checkers. To
separate C frontend processing from BTOR2-specific semantic
encoding, C2Btor follows a three-stage route.
1) It uses the parser of CBMC [15] to lower the input C
program into Goto-IR1, a verification-oriented IR with
explicit control flow and type information.
2) C2Btor encodes the Goto-IR program into a BTOR2
transition system, including program-counter-based con-
trol flow, state and next expressions for data updates,
object-level pointer modeling, and the mapping from
assumptions and assertions to constraint and bad nodes.
3) The generated BTOR2 task is discharged by hardware
model-checking backends for counterexample search and
safety proving, rather than by CBMC’s bounded-model-
checking backend.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• A C-to-BTOR2 encoding for a well-defined verification
fragment. We propose a set of encoding rules that trans-
late assertion-based C verification tasks, via Goto-IR, into
1https://diffblue.github.io/cbmc/group__goto-programs.html
arXiv:2607.17622v1  [cs.SE]  20 Jul 2026


BTOR2 transition systems. The encoding uses an explicit
program counter to model control flow, represents data
states and memory objects with bit-vectors and arrays,
and maps assumptions and assertions uniformly to con-
straint and bad nodes. This formulation makes explicit
the C fragment naturally supported by the BTOR2-based
route, including finite-state, bit-vector-friendly programs
with structured control flow, nondeterministic inputs,
fixed-width integer operations, local arrays, and restricted
object-level pointer relations.
• An end-to-end framework for reusing hardware model
checking backends. We develop C2Btor, a tool frame-
work that connects C reachability-safety tasks, the pro-
posed BTOR2 encoding, and existing hardware model-
checking backends. Given an assertion-based C program,
C2Btor generates backend-consumable BTOR2 models
and enables different backend algorithms to be applied to
the same transition-system representation for counterex-
ample search and safety proving.
• Empirical findings on complementarity and backend
algorithm behavior. We evaluate C2Btor on SV-COMP
C ReachSafety benchmarks and a curated assertion-
category dataset, showing that the BTOR2-based route
can solve tasks not covered by bounded, SMT-based,
or CHC-based software verifiers. We further analyze the
generated model-checking tasks on 390 BTOR2 models
and 305 converted AIGER models, showing that backend
algorithms play distinct roles in counterexample search
and safety proving. These findings indicate that encoding
C verification tasks into BTOR2 allows program verifica-
tion to benefit from advances in HWMCC-style backend
algorithms, thereby expanding the available capability for
bug finding and safety proving.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II discusses related work. Section III introduces BTOR2,
Goto-IR, and the formulation of ReachSafety tasks in hardware
model checking. Section IV presents the proposed encoding
method, including the overall workflow, key translation rules,
and semantic boundaries. Section V reports the experimental
design and results. Section VI discusses applicability, limita-
tions, and future work, and concludes the paper.
II. Related Work
A. C Program Verification
C program verification has been extensively studied, and
SV-COMP has helped establish a mature ecosystem of tools
and benchmarks [8]. The ReachSafety category spans several
paradigms: CBMC [15] and ESBMC [16] perform bit-precise
bounded model checking; Ultimate Automizer [17] uses in-
terpolation and refinement; CPAchecker [18] and Bubaak [19]
reflect configurable and portfolio verification; and AISE [20],
Symbiotic [21], and VeriAbs [13] combine abstraction, sym-
bolic execution, and slicing. CHC-based tools such as Eldarica
and TriCera [22, 23] reduce safety proving to invariant infer-
ence and Horn solving [14].
These tools differ in both backend algorithms and inter-
mediate representations. Goto-IR, LLVM-style representations,
SMT encodings, and CHCs expose control flow, data state,
memory, and verification conditions in different ways. This
paper is complementary: instead of building another C verifier
over a software IR, we study whether assertion-based C tasks
can be encoded into a standard hardware model-checking
format and solved by hardware backends.
B. Hardware Model Checking, AIGER, and BTOR2
Hardware model checking is reachability analysis over tran-
sition systems with initial conditions, transition relations, and
bad states. BMC [4] is effective for bounded counterexample
search, while k-Induction [5] and IC3/PDR [6, 7] prove un-
bounded safety through inductive reasoning. Recent backends
also include CAR-style reachability [24, 25] and optimized
IC3/PDR variants [26].
Hardware model checking also benefits from common task
formats. AIGER [2] is a compact bit-level representation used
by model checkers such as SimpleCAR [27]. BTOR2 [3] is
a word-level transition-system format over bit-vectors, arrays,
and state updates; it preserves word-level structure before bit-
blasting [28], and rIC3 [29] can process BTOR2 directly. We
use BTOR2 as the primary C-encoding target and AIGER as
a lower-level target for the convertible subset.
C. Bridging Hardware and Software Analysis
Hardware and software verification start from different
artifacts, but many tasks share the same transition-system core:
initial states, state updates, and error states. Existing work
has explored the hardware-to-software direction: Btor2C [30]
translates BTOR2 circuits into C programs so that hardware
models can be analyzed by software verifiers.
Our work studies the reverse direction: translating C
reachability-safety tasks into BTOR2 transition systems. Com-
pared with Btor2C, we must recover control flow, data updates,
pointer operations, assumptions, and assertion failures from C
and encode them into a hardware model-checking format.
By targeting BTOR2, our encoding turns C reachability-
safety tasks into word-level transition systems consumed by
hardware backends, allowing program verification to benefit
from advances in counterexample search and safety proving.
III. Background
A. Overview of C2Btor
Figure 1 shows the pipeline of C2Btor. The input is a C
program with assertions. C2Btor reuses the CBMC frontend
to parse, type-check, and normalize the program into Goto-IR.
We use the following notation throughout the paper:
C
FCBMC
−−−→GGotoIR
EC2Btor
−−−−→MBTOR2.
Goto-IR lowers structured C control flow into explicit program
locations and instructions. C2Btor then encodes the Goto-
IR program into a BTOR2 transition system with a set of
encoding rules. The generated BTOR2 model can then be
analyzed by different model-checking backends, such as BMC,


1
Program and Goto-IR
2
BTOR2 Model
3
Hardware Model Checking
C program
assume(C)
for ( ... ; ... ; ... ) {
...
}
assert(P)
Goto-IR
DECL  
ASSIGN 
L1: IF !(cond) GOTO L2
body
Update(cond)
GOTO L1
L2: …
Parser
A Control
Flow
B Data 
and
Instructions
C Pointers 
and
Memory
0
1
......
0
1
*(p+i)=*(p + cast(i, signedbv[64]))
D Verification
Semantics
Model
M = (X, Init, Next, B, C)
X
Init
Next
B
C
A Control 
Fow in
BTOR2
pc
t
e
B Data 
and 
Instructions in
BTOR2
BV
Sort
ARRAY
Sort
Native 
Operators
C Pointers 
and
Memory 
in BTOR2
objects
obj 0
obj 1
...
obj n
offset
0
1
2
...
63
D Verification
Semantics
in BTOR2
ASSERT ⇒BAD
ASSUME ⇒CONSTRAINT
BTOR2
Model
Reach(¬P)?
BMC
k-
induction
IC3/PDR
Others
Results
UNSAFE
SAT with
a witness
SAFE
UNSAT with
a certificate
UNKNOWN
Multiple 
Model Checkers
cond
¬cond
L1
body
L2
GOTO
GOTO
¬cond
cond
next(pc) = 
ite(cond, t, e)
P=<object, offset>
Model
ASSUME   C
Verify
Explicit 
Types
ARRAY
Sort
Native 
Operators
64 bit
ASSERT   P
Fig. 1: Overview of C2Btor.
k-Induction, and IC3/PDR. The backend result is interpreted as
a program-verification result: SAT means Unsafe and UNSAT
means Safe, and an inconclusive run is reported as unknown.
Therefore, Section III-B explains the connection between
program verification and model checking, and Section III-C
introduces the Goto-IR representation. Section III-D summa-
rizes the BTOR2 concepts used in this work.
B. From Program Verification to Model Checking
In a C program, an assertion expresses a condition that must
hold whenever execution reaches the corresponding program
point. SV-COMP ReachSafety tasks use the same idea, often
by requiring that an error function such as reach_error is
unreachable [8].
A transition system provides the target form for this reach-
ability problem. It contains state variables, initial conditions,
and transition updates. Assertions are represented as bad-state
predicates, and assumptions restrict the feasible transitions.
If a bad state is reachable, the program is unsafe and the
backend may return a counterexample. If all bad states are
proven unreachable, the program is safe under the generated
model; otherwise the result is reported as unknown or timeout.
This is the only model-checking interface required by
C2Btor. The encoder translates Goto-IR control and data up-
dates into BTOR2 state and next nodes, and maps verification
semantics to bad and constraint nodes. The resulting BTOR2
task can then be analyzed by hardware model-checking back-
ends using BMC, k-induction, or IC3/PDR.
C. Goto-IR as a Frontend Representation
Generating a transition system directly from C source code
is complicated. C contains structured control flow, implicit
conversions, expression evaluation rules, object layout, pointer
operations, and library-dependent constructs. To avoid reim-
plementing a full C frontend, C2Btor uses the Goto-IR pro-
duced by the CBMC frontend as its input representation. We
later write GGotoIR simply as G and abstract it as
G = (L, Σ, Objects, Instructs, Verif).
Here,
L = {ℓ1, ℓ2, . . . , ℓn}
is the set of Goto-IR locations, where each ℓi is the location
of one Goto-IR instruction. Σ is the static symbol table with
type information. For example,
Σ = {int x : signedbv[64],
int a[2] : signedbv[64][2],
int *p : signedbv[64]}.
Objects is the collection of program state objects. A valuation
of these objects describes the dynamic program state:
ν ∈ValΣ(Objects).
Thus, at location ℓi, a Goto-IR state is
(ℓi, ν) ∈L × ValΣ(Objects).
Instructs contains the lowered Goto-IR instructions. High-
level C control flow is represented by assignments and explicit
jumps.
Example 1. Control-Flow Lowering. A conditional branch
instruction if (A) { B } else { C } is lowered to a con-
ditional goto and two explicit branch blocks:


L1: if !A goto L_else
L2: B
L3: goto L_end
L_else: C
L_end: ...
A loop for (I; A; U) { B } is lowered to a condition
check and a back edge:
L1: I
L2: if !A goto L_end
L3: B
L4: U
L5: goto L2
L_end: ...
Goto-IR represents pointer operations as explicit typed
expressions. Pointer reads and writes keep the dereference
operation visible, while pointer arithmetic and casts expose the
bit-vector expression used to compute the accessed address.
Example 2. Pointer Expressions. A pointer read such as r
= *(p + i) is represented as:
r := ∗(p + cast(i, signedbv[64])).
Similarly a pointer write *(p + i) = v can be:
∗(p + cast(i, signedbv[64])) := v.
Verif contains verification-relevant instructions such as
assert(p) and assume(c). Assertions define bad-state condi-
tions, while assumptions define path constraints. In summary,
Goto-IR gives C2Btor an explicit, typed, and verification-
oriented program representation; the rules for translating this
representation into BTOR2 are presented in Section IV.
D. BTOR2 Transition Systems
BTOR2 is a word-level transition-system format for model
checking [3]. It is not a programming language with sequential
statements. Instead, a BTOR2 file is a numbered list of typed
definitions. Each line starts with a unique identifier, and
later lines refer to earlier identifiers to build expressions and
transition-system components. Thus, a BTOR2 model is a
graph of sorts, state nodes, input nodes, expression nodes,
and property nodes. We write the generated BTOR2 transition
system as
MBTOR2 = (X, Init, Next, B, C).
Here, X is the set of BTOR2 state nodes, Init gives their initial
values or constraints, and Next gives their synchronous next-
state updates. B is the set of bad-state predicates, and C is the
set of path constraints.
The following sketch shows the style of BTOR2 lines:
1
sort bitvec 32
2
sort bitvec 64
29 sort bitvec 1
36 constd 1 4
; integer constant 4
54 eq 29 pc L_cond
; pc == loop condition
55 slt 29 i 36
; i < 4
56 not 29 55
; !(i < 4)
57 and 29 54 56
; exit guard
59 and 29 54 55
; body guard
65 add 2 p offset
; p + offset
101 ite 1 guard val old; guarded read/update
141 next 1 sum 140
; next(sum)
200 bad 57
; reachable error
This example is schematic: names such as pc, i, and sum stand
for previously defined node identifiers. The important point is
that every computed value is a numbered node, and later lines
build larger expressions by referring to earlier identifiers.
The BTOR2 keywords can be grouped as follows.
1) Line and node definitions. Each line has a unique id
and defines either a sort or a node. Node lines include
constants such as constd, persistent variables such as state,
nondeterministic inputs such as input, and expression nodes
such as eq, add, or ite.
2) Transition symbols. state, init, and next define the transi-
tion system. state declares a variable preserved across steps,
init constrains its initial value, and next defines its value in the
next step. In encodings produced by C2Btor, ite is commonly
used inside next expressions to encode guarded control-flow
and data updates.
3) Data symbols. Data is typed by sort lines. The main
sorts used here are bitvec and array. Bit-vectors represent
integers, Booleans, program locations, object identifiers, and
offsets; arrays represent indexed program objects or memory-
like objects. Constants such as const and constd provide
typed literal values.
4) Operator symbols. BTOR2 provides many typed operators;
the complete set is given in the BTOR2 specification [3].
This paper mainly uses Boolean and bit-vector operators such
as not, and, eq, slt, arithmetic operators such as add, sub,
mul, udiv, conditional ite, and array read/write. Each operator
produces another typed node.
5) Verification symbols. bad defines an error-state predicate,
and constraint restricts feasible traces. They correspond to B
and C in MBTOR2. A backend checks whether some bad node
can become true along a trace satisfying the init, next, and
constraint lines.
In summary, BTOR2 provides the target vocabulary for
numbered expressions, states, data, operations, and reachability
properties. Section IV explains how C2Btor performs this
encoding for control flow, data state, pointer-related objects,
and verification assertions.
IV. Methodology
A. Overview
The goal of this methodology is not to redefine C semantics.
Instead, C2Btor encodes the control flow, objects, instructions,
and verification semantics already made explicit in Goto-IR
into a BTOR2 transition system. Given the Goto-IR object
G = (L, Σ, Objects, Instructs, Verif) defined in Section III-C,
we write O = Objects, I = Instructs, and V = Verif for
compact notation. The overall mapping is
G = (L, Σ, O, I, V ) →M = (X, Init, Next, B, C).
We organize the encoding rules by the following aspects:


Algorithm 1: Symbolic workflow of C2Btor
Input: G = (L, Σ, O, I, V ), where L = {ℓ1, . . . , ℓn}
Output: M = (X, Init, Next, B, C)
1 foreach ℓi ∈L do
2
nodei ←bv64(i);
ati ←(pc = nodei)
// control code
and guard
3 X ←{pc} ∪Xdata(Σ, O) ∪Xmem(Σ, O) ∪Xaux
// BTOR2
states
4 Init ←Initpc ∪Initdata ∪Initmem
// initial states
5 foreach x ∈X do
6
Ux ←∅
// guarded updates
7 B ←∅;
C ←∅
8 foreach ℓi ∈L do
9
ιi ←I[ℓi]
// instruction at location ℓi
10
(∆i, δi, Bi, Ci) ←Step(ιi, ati, Σ, O)
// local encoding
11
Upc ←Upc ∪{(ati, δi)}
// control-flow update
12
foreach (x, g, v) ∈∆i do
13
Ux ←Ux ∪{(g, v)}
// data or memory update
14
B ←B ∪Bi;
C ←C ∪Ci
// properties and
constraints
15 foreach x ∈X do
16
Next(x) ←Fold(Ux, default(x))
// one next per state
17 return M = (X, Init, Next, B, C)
Aspect
Goto-IR source
BTOR2 target
Control flow
L, GOTO, RETURN
pc, next(pc)
Data state
Σ, O
X, Init
Instruction updates
I
Next
Pointers and memory
Oaddr, pointer expressions
Xmem, read, write
Verification
V
B, C
Encoding workflow. Algorithm 1 shows the overall encoding
workflow. Its role is to connect the categories above, not to
expose implementation details.
B. Control-Flow Encoding
The program counter pc is a 64-bit bit-vector state. A
BTOR2 line such as 2 sort bitvec 64 declares the 64-bit
sort; the actual program counter is a state node that uses this
sort. The value stored in pc is not a BTOR2 line id. Instead,
pc = i means that the current transition executes the Goto-
IR location ℓi. For compact formulas below, atℓi abbreviates
pc = i.
The two BTOR2 keywords used most often in this encoding
are next and ite. A next node defines the value of a state in
the next transition step. An expression ite(c, a, b) means “if c
then a else b”. A next defines how a state changes, while ite
is only a way to build the right-hand side of a next definition.
Let Ii be the Goto-IR instruction at location ℓi. The next
value of pc has four common cases:
pc′ =









i + 1,
Ii is sequential,
ti,
Ii = GOTO(ci, ℓti) ∧E(ci),
i + 1,
Ii = GOTO(ci, ℓti) ∧¬E(ci),
pchalt,
Ii ∈{RETURN, END}.
(pc = i)
Here, i+1 denotes the next executable location in the Goto-IR
sequence, Ii = GOTO(ci, ℓti) denotes a conditional Goto-IR
branch at location ℓi, ci is its guard, ℓti is its target location,
and ti is the encoded pc value of that target. The expression
E(ci) is the BTOR2 encoding of the guard, and pchalt is the
terminal location. An unconditional GOTO is treated as the same
rule with a true guard. The local successor for a conditional
branch is
δi = ite(E(ci), ti, i + 1).
BTOR2 requires one next node for pc, so all local control-flow
rules are chained into one expression:
next(pc) = ite(pc = 0, δ0, ite(pc = 1, δ1, . . . , pchalt)).
The same pattern is used later for data states: C2Btor collects
guarded candidate updates and folds them into a single one,
next(x) = ite(g1, v1, ite(g2, v2, . . . , x)).
The final default value preserves the current state when no
guard is enabled.
Loops are not unrolled by C2Btor. Back edges in Goto-
IR are encoded directly in next(pc), so a source-level loop
becomes a cycle in the generated BTOR2 transition system.
Whether this cycle is explored using bounded model checking,
k-induction, IC3/PDR, or another hardware model-checking
algorithm is a responsibility of the backend. Hence, C2Btor
does not produce a fixed-depth C-to-BMC formula; it pro-
duces a transition system that can be consumed by multiple
unbounded or bounded hardware model checkers.
C. Data State
Data-state rules decide which BTOR2 states are created for
program objects and which initial values are placed in Init.
For each Goto-IR type τ, let W(τ) be its bit-width under the
frontend’s target-machine configuration; in practice, this width
is usually 32 or 64 bits for machine integer and pointer-related
types.
1) Scalars and constants. Boolean and integer-like objects,
including char, short, int, long, unsigned variants, and
enum objects, are represented as bit-vector states:
x : τ
7→
x : BV(W(τ)).
For example, in our encoding, bool is encoded as BV(1), while
int and unsigned int are encoded as BV(64). Signedness does
not change the state sort. A signed integer and an unsigned
integer of the same width have the same state type; signedness
only selects the operator used later by an instruction. Constants
are generated with the width required by their expression
context.
2) Arrays. For an array object a : τ[N], C2Btor uses
either scalarization or a BTOR2 array state. A small statically
bounded array can be scalarized into element states:
a 7→{a0, a1, . . . , aN−1},
ai : BV(W(τ)).
For larger arrays, C2Btor uses a native BTOR2 array state:
a : τ[N]
7→
a : Array(N, τ).
Here, Array(N, τ) is a paper-level shorthand: N denotes the
index range of the array and τ denotes the element type.


In BTOR2, this state is implemented by a native array sort
with a bit-vector index sort and an element sort of width
W(τ). BTOR2 read returns an element, and write returns
an updated array state. Scalarization avoids array reasoning
for small arrays, whereas native array states avoid expanding
large arrays into many state variables.
3) Structures and layout. Structures are represented by field
projection. For example, struct S { int x; unsigned
int y; }; struct S s; is encoded as one object-level
record whose fields are stored separately:
s 7→⟨x : sx, y : sy⟩,
s.x 7→sx : BV(64),
s.y 7→sy : BV(64).
The first line records that s is still one structure object; the
second line shows the BTOR2 state created for each field. Ad-
dressable structures and arrays also receive layout information,
such as object identifiers, field offsets, and element sizes. That
layout is used by the pointer rules, but it does not require every
object to be represented as a byte-addressed memory array.
4) Pointer values. Pointer-typed variables are also stored as
64-bit bit-vector states. This rule only says how the pointer
value is stored. Pointer arithmetic, dereference reads, writes,
and linked data structures are handled by the object-level
pointer model in Section IV-E.
5) Initialization. Static zero initialization and explicit initial-
izers are encoded in Init. Verification nondeterminism is not
initialization: a call such as __VERIFIER_nondet_int() is
an instruction-level input and is captured in Next.
D. Instruction Encoding
Instruction rules describe how Goto-IR expressions and
instructions generate BTOR2 operators and next-state updates.
1) Arithmetic expressions. Arithmetic expressions are en-
coded using native BTOR2 bit-vector operators. For example,
addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and remainder
become the corresponding word-level operators of the required
width. Signedness selects the signed or unsigned variant where
BTOR2 distinguishes them.
2) Bitwise, logical, and cast expressions. Bitwise operations,
logical operations, comparisons, shifts, and conditional expres-
sions are also encoded with native BTOR2 operators, such as
and, or, not, eq, slt, shifts, and ite. Casts are encoded as
truncation, zero extension, sign extension, or reinterpretation
at the required bit-width.
3) Assignments. For a simple assignment at location ℓi,
written Ii : x := e, C2Btor encodes the right-hand side as
E(e) and adds one guarded update to Tx:
Tx ←Tx ∪{(pc = i, E(e))}.
If this is the only assignment to x, the resulting update is
next(x) = ite(pc = i, E(e), x).
If several locations assign to x, all candidate updates are
combined by the folded form in Equation IV-B. Pointer writes
and array writes may add extra guards, such as an index
equality or an object-identifier check.
4) Lowered branches and loops. Conditional control flow has
already been lowered by Goto-IR. A source if-else becomes
conditional GOTO instructions, and for/while loops become
the same conditional branches with back edges. Their effect
on pc is encoded by the control-flow rules in Section IV-B;
they are not separate high-level C constructs in the BTOR2
model.
E. Pointers and Memory
C2Btor encodes memory as an object-level memory model
instead of one flat byte-addressed array, and each statically
resolved addressable object has an object id, and each pointer
is interpreted as an object-offset pair. The object id selects the
logical object; the offset is the byte position inside that object.
1) Addressable objects. Memory is stored as a finite object
map built from the symbol table:
M = {id(o) 7→repr(o) | o ∈Oaddr}.
Here, Oaddr contains the addressable objects selected for the
encoding. Their backing representations are the data states
introduced earlier:
scalar x
7→
BV state,
array a
7→
scalarized elements or a BTOR2 array state,
struct s
7→
projected field states.
Only objects that can be statically resolved become backing
objects for pointer accesses.
2) Pointer representation. A pointer value is modeled as
p = ⟨obj(p), off(p)⟩.
For example,
&a[i] = ⟨id(a), i·sizeof(int)⟩,
&s.g = ⟨id(s), fieldoff(g)⟩.
The pointer type comes from the Goto-IR expression type and
the symbol table. Layout information comes from the target
configuration, including sizeof, element size, field offset,
alignment, and object bounds. Thus p+1 preserves the object
id and advances the offset by the size of the pointed-to type:
p + i = ⟨obj(p), off(p) + i · sizeof(∗p)⟩.
3) Dereference by object dispatch. A dereference is resolved
by dispatching on the object id and then using the offset inside
the selected backing object:
deref(p, τ) =





accessa(off(p), τ),
obj(p) = id(a),
accesss(off(p), τ),
obj(p) = id(s),
unsupported,
otherwise.
For a read, access returns the selected scalar, array element,
or structure field. For a write, the same object guard is used
to update the corresponding backing state.


4) Validity and unsupported cases. Pointer safety is ex-
pressed by object-level predicates:
valid(p, τ) ≡p̸ = 0 ∧
∨
o∈T (p)
(
obj(p) = id(o)
∧aligned(off(p), τ)
∧off(p) + sizeof(τ) ≤u sizeof(o)
)
.
The predicate checks non-nullness, object match, alignment,
and object bounds. When Goto-IR contains such checks as
assertions or equivalent guards, their violations are translated
into BTOR2 bad predicates. If the target object, offset, or
access type cannot be statically represented by the object-level
model, C2Btor rejects the translation instead of emitting an
unsound approximation.
In short, pointers are represented as object-offset pairs rather
than concrete byte addresses. Dereferences are resolved by
dispatching on the object id to finite typed backing objects,
while the offset, access type, alignment, and object bounds
determine the precise read or write location.
F. Verification Properties
C2Btor encodes verification as reachability over bad pred-
icates and path constraints. A Goto assertion ASSERT cℓat
location ℓbecomes a location-guarded bad predicate:
bℓ= atℓ∧¬E(cℓ).
Thus an assertion fails only when execution reaches ℓand the
encoded condition is false. A Goto assumption ASSUME cℓis
not an error; it is a path filter encoded as a constraint:
χℓ= (¬atℓ) ∨E(cℓ).
Multiple assertions and assumptions are collected into B and
C, and explicit runtime checks or error locations are handled
by the same bad-predicate rule when they already appear.
G. Summary
The encoding maintains one consistent chain of symbols
across the chapter:
ℓi
7→
nodei = bv64(i)
7→
ati = (pc = nodei).
Control-flow rules populate Upc, instruction rules populate the
update lists Ux for data and memory states, and verification
rules populate B and C. Each update list is folded into one
BTOR2 next expression. The result is the BTOR2 transition
system M = (X, Init, Next, B, C).
V. Evaluation
A. Experimental Design
Our experiments focus on four research questions:
RQ1: Can C2Btor perform end-to-end verification on sup-
ported standard C verification tasks?
RQ2: Does the C-to-BTOR2 representation route pro-
vide complementary solving capability to existing
software-verification routes?
305
169
193
130
80
199
218
323
141
59
49
126
128
82
49
118
82
122
TF=6
TF=32
TF=1
TF=2
TF=20
FT=3
FT=2
FT=8
306
278
5
430
163
215
430
33
93
269
413
85
377
148
2
324
465
1
46
1
6
3
24
162
5
1
25
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Aise
Bubaak
CPAchecker
ESBMC
CBMC
Symbiotic
Uautomizer
Veriabs
C2Btor
FAIL
OOM
UNKNOWN
OOT
FT
TF
FF
TT
Fig. 2: Comparison of C2Btor with other program verifiers
on SV-COMP benchmarks.
RQ3: How do hardware model-checking algorithms per-
form on the verification tasks generated by C2Btor?
RQ4: What properties and C semantics are currently cov-
ered by C2Btor, and where are its verification bound-
aries?
B. Experimental Environment
All experiments were conducted on the same server
equipped with an Intel Xeon Gold 6132 CPU at 2.60 GHz, 28
cores, and 96 GB memory, running CentOS 7 Core on x86_64.
Each verification task was limited to 900 s and 16 GB. C2Btor
is developed based on CBMC 6.7.1. The implementation
is available in the artifact repository.2 We implemented our
experimental scripts for execution and resource control, while
keeping the result classification consistent with BenchExec-
style.3 Each tool result is normalized as follows:
• Correct verdicts. TT denotes a True verdict on a true
task, and FF denotes a False verdict on a false task. The
correct-verdict rate is (TT + FF)/N.
• Wrong verdicts. TF is a false alarm, namely a False
verdict on a true task; FT is a missed bug, namely a
True verdict on a false task. The wrong-verdict rate is
(TF + FT)/N.
• Inconclusive outcomes. Unknown, OOT, and OOM
mean that the tool does not return a Boolean verdict
within the configured resource limit. The inconclusive
rate is (Unknown + OOT + OOM)/N.
• Abnormal outcomes. FAIL denotes an unsupported-
input failure before solving, while ERR denotes a crash.
These outcomes are reported separately when needed
because they usually reflect semantic coverage boundaries
or implementation robustness problems rather than ordi-
nary backend verdicts.
C. RQ1: Verification Capability on SV-COMP Benchmarks
Dataset. To evaluate verification capability on standard
benchmarks, we use 773 C ReachSafety tasks from SV-COMP
2026, covering Array, BV, and Loop programs.
2https://anonymous.4open.science
3https://github.com/sosy-lab/benchexec


214
135
71
154
107
29
54
72
75
43
37
FT=3
143
48
239
61
128
14
197
46
64
101
65
0
100
200
300
400
500
ESBMC
CBMC
Eldarica
C2Btor
FAIL
OOM
UNKNOWN
OOT
FT
TF
FF
TT
Fig. 3: Comparison of assertion verification and expressiveness
on a curated benchmark set.
TABLE I: Percentage comparison of C2Btor with other pro-
gram verifiers on SV-COMP benchmarks (Correct / Wrong /
Inconclusive, %).
Tool
Array
BV
Loop
All
TF/FT
(N = 412)
(N = 49)
(N = 312)
(N = 773)
(all)
AISE
22.3/2.2/75.2 67.3/0.0/32.7 76.6/0.0/23.4 47.1/1.2/51.6
6/3
Bubaak
13.1/0.2/85.9 38.8/0.0/61.2 46.5/0.3/52.2 28.2/0.3/70.8
0/2
CPAchecker
17.5/7.8/74.3 89.8/0.0/10.2 65.1/0.0/34.6 41.3/4.1/54.2
32/0
ESBMC
19.2/0.0/80.8 71.4/0.0/28.6 46.2/0.0/53.8 33.4/0.0/66.6
0/0
CBMC-BMC-200
9.2/0.0/86.9
67.3/0.0/32.7 29.2/0.3/67.9 21.0/0.1/75.8
1/0
Symbiotic
16.0/0.0/83.5 73.5/0.0/24.5
46.8/0.0/2.2
32.1/0.0/47.0
0/0
UAutomizer
19.2/0.0/80.3 71.4/0.0/26.5 71.2/0.0/28.2 43.5/0.0/55.9
0/0
VeriAbs
45.4/1.7/52.7 0.0/0.0/100.0 69.9/1.0/29.2 52.4/1.3/46.2
2/8
C2Btor (Ours)
17.7/4.6/76.2 75.5/0.0/24.5 49.0/0.3/44.6 34.0/2.6/60.2
20/0
Comparison tools. The comparison covers three groups:
• Top tools in the SV-COMP C ReachSafety category4:
CPAchecker, ESBMC with --kind, and Symbiotic;
• SOTA tools on the Array and Loop subsets: AISE,
Bubaak, VeriAbs, and UAutomizer;
• Baseline: CBMC with --bmc --unwind 200.
The above tools are run with their corresponding SV-COMP
tool configurations.5
Figure 2 shows that C2Btor generates BTOR2 models for
748 out of 773 tasks. Model generation is reported separately
from verification correctness: C2Btor correctly solves 263
tasks, 101 more than the bounded CBMC baseline, while the
remaining generated cases may still be inconclusive or wrong-
verdict outcomes. This shows that the BTOR2 route can benefit
from backend model-checking algorithms beyond bounded
unwinding. All wrong verdicts of C2Btor are TF false alarms,
which can be further inspected through counterexample or
witness validation; more importantly, no FT missed bug is
observed, whereas three comparison tools report at least one
FT case.
Table I reports the same experiment as category-level Cor-
rect / Wrong / Inconclusive percentages, with TF for false
alarms and FT for missed bugs. The results show that C2Btor
4https://sv-comp.sosy-lab.org/2026/results/results-verified/
5https://gitlab.com/sosy-lab/benchmarking/fm-tools/-/tree/main/data
is strongest on BV tasks, where it correctly solves 75.5%
of the benchmarks, reports no wrong verdicts, and is second
only to CPAchecker. This advantage is not captured by overall
solved rate alone: VeriAbs has the highest overall solved rate
in Table I, but solves no BV task in this experiment. The
contrast reflects different method strengths. VeriAbs mainly
extends bounded model checking with abstract acceleration
and k-induction for large or unknown loop bounds, whereas
BV programs match the BTOR2 route more directly: both
BTOR2 and hardware model checkers natively support fixed-
width bit-vector operations and transition-system structure.
Thus, bit-vector-heavy programs fit the target representation
more naturally than memory-intensive programs.
Array tasks are the main precision and scalability bottle-
neck. C2Btor correctly solves 17.7% of the Array benchmarks,
which is close to CPAchecker but clearly below the strongest
tools in this category. At the same time, Array accounts for
19 of the 20 TF false alarms and has a high inconclusive rate
of 76.2%. Among the three benchmark categories, Array tasks
are the most diﬀicult for the current BTOR2 route: they tend
to induce larger bit-level encodings and more OOT outcomes.
This concentration suggests that array-heavy programs stress
both the object/array encoding and the backend solver, making
this category the current boundary of C2Btor’s accuracy and
solving effectiveness.
Loop tasks show a more balanced result. C2Btor correctly
solves 49.0% of the Loop benchmarks, outperforming Bubaak
and the bounded CBMC baseline. The low wrong-verdict rate
of 0.3% suggests that the program-counter-based transition
relation can handle a meaningful subset of standard loop safety
tasks. Manual inspection of abnormal outcomes indicates that
these cases are mainly caused by loop tasks combined with
array or memory features, where unsupported frontend cases
and backend diﬀiculty overlap.
Answer to RQ1: C2Btor establishes an effective ver-
ification route. It generates BTOR2 models for 96.7%
of the tasks and obtains correct verdicts for 263 tasks,
while other cases remain inconclusive or become TF false
alarms. It also performs well on BV tasks, correctly solving
75.5% of them without wrong verdicts. This confirms
the effectiveness of the C2Btor modeling route and its
advantage on BV tasks.
D. RQ2: Complementarity across Verification Encodings
Dataset. To evaluate whether the C2Btor route provides
solving behavior complementary to existing verification encod-
ings, especially on what kinds of assertions it can verify, we
combine self-constructed programs with benchmarks from the
TriCera dataset [23]6, yielding a curated assertion benchmark
set of 525 tasks.
Verification routes. There are four representative routes:
• ESBMC: LLVM-IR and SMT solving;
• CBMC: Goto-IR and SAT solving;
6https://zenodo.org/records/5831003


TABLE II: Assertion verification and expressiveness comparison on the curated benchmark set. For each baseline tool, entries
report Tool solved / Tool-only / C2Btor-only tasks; the last column reports tasks solved by C2Btor.
Assertion target
Representative tasks
N
ESBMC
CBMC
Eldarica
C2Btor (Ours)
Functional correctness
Tree/Array: arithmetic, search, sort, and
data-structure operation checks
324
133 / 13 / 2
87 / 7 / 42
71 / 2 / 53
122
Pointer consistency
Lists/Heap: next/prev pointers, aliasing, and
nullness checks
181
168 / 70 / 4
70 / 15 / 47
40 / 16 / 78
102
Boundary safety
Stack/Queue/Array: capacity and bounds checks
20
20 / 18 / 0
8 / 8 / 2
15 / 13 / 0
2
Overall
Assertion-category dataset
525
321 / 101 / 6
165 / 30 / 91
126 / 31 / 131
226
• Eldarica: CHC encoding with CHC solving;
• C2Btor: BTOR2 encoding with btor-ic3 model checker.
From the overall results in Table II, C2Btor correctly solves
226 out of 525 tasks, showing that it already provides non-
trivial end-to-end solving capability. Compared with ESBMC,
the additional gain of C2Btor is limited, suggesting that the
LLVM-IR/SMT-based route still provides stronger overall cov-
erage in C semantic parsing, program modeling, and backend
verification. However, compared with CBMC and Eldarica,
C2Btor solves more tasks correctly. This is because the former
are respectively constrained by a single --bmc configuration
or a CHC/CEGAR solving route, whereas C2Btor can reuse a
broader set of BTOR2 backend algorithms. This indicates that
one advantage of the BTOR2 transition-system representation
is its ability to host diverse model-checking algorithms.
This complementarity is not uniformly distributed across
different assertion targets. For functional-correctness tasks,
C2Btor correctly solves 122 tasks, close to the 133 tasks
solved by ESBMC. This category is the largest one and
mainly includes return-value comparisons, local numeric re-
lations, array-element relations, and loop postcondition asser-
tions. Therefore, in this category, C2Btor mainly provides
comparable coverage rather than substantial unique solving
capability. For the currently supported restricted pointer as-
sertions, C2Btor provides more complementary value relative
to CBMC and Eldarica, because pointer relations can often
be finitized into object identifiers, field relations, or index
relations, and further reduced to bit-vector representations.
This matches the bit-precise transition-system representation
of BTOR2. In contrast, boundary-safety tasks are not the
current strength of C2Btor. These tasks usually involve array
bounds, capacity constraints, and range relations inside loops,
and therefore more directly expose the coverage boundary of
the current translation implementation.
Overall, C2Btor can reuse BTOR2 backend model-checking
algorithms, which is one of its advantages over CBMC and
Eldarica. For boundary-capacity checks, complex heap/list
semantics, and tasks requiring stronger global invariant rea-
soning, the current method still has room for improvement. At
the same time, C2Btor provides an additional solving route for
a subset of finite and explicit-state C safety tasks, especially
local functional assertions, relational assertions, and assertions
expressible as bit-vector reachability.
TABLE III: Model-checking tool and algorithm comparison
on the BTOR2 dataset.
Backend
Correct (TT/FF) TF FT OOT OOM Unknown FAIL
rIC3-BMC
69 (0/69)
0
0
211
0
0
110
rIC3-k-Induction 177 (108/69)
0
0
103
0
0
110
rIC3-IC3
253 (177/76)
0
0
33
0
0
104
simpleCAR-IC3
230 (170/60)
0
0
23
0
0
137
Answer to RQ2: Yes. C2Btor provides a distinct and use-
ful verification route that complements existing software-
verification routes. The BTOR2 route solves tasks that are
not solved by CBMC-BMC and Eldarica, showing inde-
pendent solving capability. This complementarity is most
visible on functional-correctness and restricted pointer-
consistency assertions, where local value relations, array-
element relations, return-value assertions, and object-level
pointer relations can be effectively represented as finite
bit-vector transition systems.
E. RQ3: Backend Algorithms on Generated Hardware Models
Dataset. To evaluate the capability and task sensitivity
of backend hardware model-checking algorithms, we start
from 390 validated BTOR2 models generated by C2Btor and
convert them to AIGER through the btor2aiger tool [1, 3],
obtaining a second dataset of 305 AIGER models. The re-
maining 85 models are excluded because their array structures
are not supported by the tool.
Model-checking tools and algorithms. We compare the
following tools and algorithm configurations:
• rIC3-BMC [29]: --bmc for AIGER and --wlbmc for
BTOR2;
• rIC3-k-Induction: --kind for AIGER and --wlkind
for BTOR2;
• rIC3-IC3: --ic3 for both AIGER and BTOR2;
• simpleCAR-IC3 [25, 27]: --ic3 for both AIGER and
BTOR2;
• super_prove [31]: portfolio-based unbounded model
checking on AIGER.
For this backend-level experiment, TT denotes a true-label
task proved safe by the solver, corresponding to a solver-level
UNSAT result. FF denotes a false-label task for which the
solver finds a counterexample, corresponding to a solver-level
SAT result.


TABLE IV: Model-checking tool and algorithm comparison
on the AIGER dataset.
Backend
Correct (TT/FF) TF FT OOT OOM Unknown FAIL
rIC3-BMC
78 (0/78)
0
0
64
163
0
0
rIC3-k-Induction 212 (134/78)
0
0
93
0
0
0
rIC3-IC3
268 (190/78)
0
0
37
0
0
0
simpleCAR-IC3
275 (198/77)
0
0
30
0
0
0
super_prove
276 (200/76)
0
0
26
2
0
1
Table III shows a clear division of labor among BTOR2
backend algorithms between safety proving and counterexam-
ple finding. For tasks that require proving safety, BMC can
only search for counterexamples within a bounded unfolding
depth and cannot establish unbounded safety. In contrast, k-
induction and IC3/PDR can construct inductive safety evi-
dence, with rIC3-IC3 proving the largest number of true-
label tasks. On BTOR2 models generated by C2Btor, word-
level BMC is also sensitive to array sorts, memory objects,
and control-flow unfolding, which can quickly enlarge the
generated formulas and lead to many OOT or FAIL outcomes.
IC3/PDR does not rely only on depth-based unrolling; instead,
it advances the reachable state space in a property-directed
way, which explains why it covers more safety proofs while
still finding counterexamples.
Table IV shows that the AIGER subset has a higher solving
ratio. On this bit-level subset, counterexample finding is no
longer the main source of difference, since most configurations
find a similar number of false-label cases. The main separation
comes from safety proving: IC3-style backends with stronger
simplification, induction, and portfolio strategies prove more
safe tasks. This indicates that optimizations in hardware
model-checking algorithms can further improve the verification
capability of models generated by C2Btor. However, this result
must be interpreted together with the input scope: the AIGER
subset excludes array-related models, so its higher solving ratio
is not a full replacement for complete BTOR2 coverage.
Overall, the models generated by C2Btor can indeed reuse
hardware model-checking backends, but backend effectiveness
depends on both the verification objective and the target
format. The advantage of BTOR2 is that it preserves word-
level expressiveness and can model array-related programs, al-
though current BTOR2 backends still face input-compatibility
and tool-robustness bottlenecks. After conversion to AIGER,
C2Btor can benefit from more mature bit-level backends, but
this comes at the cost of losing array-structure coverage.
Answer to RQ3: Hardware model-checking algorithms
are effective on the verification tasks generated by C2Btor,
and their effects are algorithm-specific. BMC is useful for
exposing counterexamples, while induction- and IC3/PDR-
style algorithms are more effective at proving program
safety. The results further show that progress in hardware
model checking can directly improve the verification ca-
pability of C programs translated by C2Btor.
F. RQ4: Semantic Coverage and Verification Boundaries
Answer to RQ4: C2Btor has a clear and useful effective
scope: finite-state, bit-precise, assertion-based reachability
safety. This scope already supports meaningful C verifica-
tion tasks with explicit control flow, local data reasoning,
and restricted object-level pointer relations, while also
identifying concrete targets for extending BTOR2-based
C verification.
C2Btor encodes an assertion violation as a BTOR2 bad
state, and verification checks whether this state is reachable
in the generated transition system. This formulation naturally
matches C programs whose behavior can be represented by
explicit control-flow transitions and fixed-width data updates.
The current encoding supports control flow with branches and
loops, nondeterministic inputs, fixed-width integer operations,
assumptions and assertions, local array accesses, and restricted
object-level pointer relations. The preceding results show that
this semantic fragment is practically useful: C2Btor provides
end-to-end verification capability on standard ReachSafety
tasks, behaves particularly well on BV-heavy programs and
local functional assertions, and generates BTOR2/AIGER
models that can reuse hardware model-checking algorithms.
The experiments also make the current boundary concrete.
Array-intensive programs are the main stress cases, because
array updates, symbolic indices, and loops can produce large
word-level transition relations and shift more memory rea-
soning to the backend. Programs involving complex aliasing,
dynamic heap manipulation, complex standard-library behav-
ior, floating-point arithmetic, or full C undefined-behavior
semantics require stronger frontend modeling than the current
prototype provides. These cases point to the next extension
targets: more compact memory encodings, richer heap and
alias modeling, library summaries, and broader C semantic
coverage.
Overall, C2Btor already provides a practical hardware-
model-checking route for a useful class of finite, bit-precise C
reachability-safety tasks. The current boundaries further clar-
ify how BTOR2-based program verification can be extended
toward broader C semantics.
VI. Conclusion
This paper presented C2Btor, a C-to-BTOR2 verification
route for assertion-based reachability safety. C2Btor models
the program into a BTOR2 transition system by encoding
control flow with a program counter, representing program
data with bit-vectors and arrays, and mapping assumptions
and assertion violations to BTOR2 constraints and bad states.
The evaluation shows that this route is effective in practice:
C2Btor generates BTOR2 models for 96.7% of the standard
ReachSafety tasks and obtains correct verdicts for 263 cases,
while keeping model generation distinct from verification
correctness. It is particularly effective on BV-heavy programs,
where it solves 75.5% of the tasks without wrong verdicts,
and it also provides complementary solving capability over


CBMC-BMC and Eldarica on functional correctness and re-
stricted pointer-consistency assertions. The backend experi-
ments further show that C2Btor-generated models can directly
benefit from hardware model-checking algorithms, especially
k-induction, IC3/PDR, and portfolio-based proving. Future
work will extend this route with more compact memory
encodings, richer alias and heap modeling, stronger library
summaries, broader C semantic coverage, and more adaptive
backend selection.
References
[1] A. Biere, N. Froleyks, and M. Preiner, “Hardware model
checking competition 2025,” in 2025 Formal Methods in
Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD).
IEEE, 2025, pp.
1–1.
[2] A. Biere, K. Heljanko, and S. Wieringa, “Aiger 1.9 and
beyond,” 2011.
[3] A. Niemetz, M. Preiner, C. Wolf, and A. Biere, “Btor2,
btormc and boolector 3.0,” in International Conference
on Computer Aided Verification.
Springer, 2018, pp.
587–595.
[4] A. Biere, A. Cimatti, E. M. Clarke, O. Strichman, and
Y. Zhu, “Bounded model checking.” Handbook of satis-
fiability, vol. 185, no. 99, pp. 457–481, 2009.
[5] D. Jovanović and B. Dutertre, “Property-directed k-
induction,” in 2016 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided
Design (FMCAD).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 85–92.
[6] A. R. Bradley, “Sat-based model checking without
unrolling,” in International Workshop on Verification,
Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation.
Springer,
2011, pp. 70–87.
[7] N. Eén, A. Mishchenko, and R. Brayton, “Eﬀicient im-
plementation of property directed reachability,” in 2011
Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 125–134.
[8] D. Beyer and J. Strejček, “Evaluating software verifiers
for c, java, and sv-lib: (report on sv-comp 2026),” in
International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the
Construction and Analysis of Systems.
Springer, 2026,
pp. 461–502.
[9] F. Merz, S. Falke, and C. Sinz, “Llbmc: Bounded model
checking of c and c++ programs using a compiler ir,”
in International Conference on Verified Software: Tools,
Theories, Experiments.
Springer, 2012, pp. 146–161.
[10] A. Gurfinkel, “Program verification with constrained
horn clauses,” in International Conference on Computer
Aided Verification.
Springer, 2022, pp. 19–29.
[11] C. Barrett, A. Stump, C. Tinelli et al., “The smt-lib
standard: Version 2.0,” in Proceedings of the 8th in-
ternational workshop on satisfiability modulo theories
(Edinburgh, UK), vol. 13, 2010, p. 14.
[12] J. C. King, “Symbolic execution and program testing,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 385–394,
1976.
[13] M. Afzal, A. Asia, A. Chauhan, B. Chimdyalwar,
P. Darke, A. Datar, S. Kumar, and R. Venkatesh, “Ve-
riabs: Verification by abstraction and test generation,”
in 2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering (ASE).
IEEE, 2019,
pp. 1138–1141.
[14] N. Bjørner, A. Gurfinkel, K. McMillan, and A. Ry-
balchenko, “Horn clause solvers for program verifica-
tion,” in Fields of Logic and Computation II: Essays
Dedicated to Yuri Gurevich on the Occasion of His 75th
Birthday.
Springer, 2015, pp. 24–51.
[15] E. Clarke, D. Kroening, and F. Lerda, “A tool for check-
ing ansi-c programs,” in International Conference on
Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis
of Systems.
Springer, 2004, pp. 168–176.
[16] L. Cordeiro, B. Fischer, and J. Marques-Silva, “Smt-
based bounded model checking for embedded ansi-c
software,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 957–974, 2011.
[17] M. Heizmann, Y.-F. Chen, D. Dietsch, M. Greitschus,
J. Hoenicke, Y. Li, A. Nutz, B. Musa, C. Schilling,
T. Schindler et al., “Ultimate automizer and the search
for perfect interpolants: (competition contribution),” in
International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the
Construction and Analysis of Systems.
Springer, 2018,
pp. 447–451.
[18] D.
Baier,
D.
Beyer,
P.-C.
Chien,
M.-C.
Jakobs,
M.
Jankola,
M.
Kettl,
N.-Z.
Lee,
T.
Lemberger,
M. Lingsch-Rosenfeld, H. Wachowitz et al., “Soft-
ware verification with cpachecker 3.0: Tutorial and user
guide,” in International Symposium on Formal Methods.
Springer, 2024, pp. 543–570.
[19] M. Chalupa and C. Richter, “Bubaak: Dynamic coop-
erative verification: (competition contribution),” in In-
ternational Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the
Construction and Analysis of Systems.
Springer, 2025,
pp. 212–216.
[20] Z. Wang and Z. Chen, “Aise: A symbolic verifier by syn-
ergizing abstract interpretation and symbolic execution
(competition contribution),” in International Conference
on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Anal-
ysis of Systems.
Springer, 2024, pp. 347–352.
[21] M. Jonáš, K. Kumor, J. Novák, J. Sedláček, M. Trtík,
L. Zaoral, P. Ayaziová, and J. Strejček, “Symbiotic
10: Lazy memory initialization and compact symbolic
execution: (competition contribution),” in International
Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction
and Analysis of Systems.
Springer, 2024, pp. 406–411.
[22] H. Hojjat and P. Rümmer, “The eldarica horn solver,”
in 2018 Formal Methods in Computer Aided Design
(FMCAD).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–7.
[23] Z. Esen and P. Rümmer, “Tricera: Verifying c programs
using the theory of heaps,” in 2022 Formal Methods in
Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD).
IEEE, 2022, pp.
380–391.
[24] X. Zhang, S. Xiao, Y. Xia, J. Li, M. Chen, and G. Pu,
“Accelerate safety model checking based on comple-
mentary approximate reachability,” IEEE Transactions


on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and
Systems, vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 3105–3117, 2023.
[25] Y. Xia, A. Becchi, A. Cimatti, A. Griggio, J. Li, and
G. Pu, “Searching for i-good lemmas to accelerate safety
model checking,” in International Conference on Com-
puter Aided Verification.
Springer, 2023, pp. 288–308.
[26] X. Zhou, G. Hu, H. Zhang, and W. Zhang, “A-
ic3:
Learning-guided
adaptive
inductive
generaliza-
tion for hardware model checking,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.21688, 2026.
[27] J. Li, R. Dureja, G. Pu, K. Y. Rozier, and M. Y.
Vardi, “Simplecar: An eﬀicient bug-finding tool based on
approximate reachability,” in International Conference
on Computer Aided Verification.
Springer, 2018, pp.
37–44.
[28] A. Biere, “Tutorial on world-level model checking,” in
2020 Formal Methods in Computer Aided Design (FM-
CAD).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–1.
[29] Y. Su, Q. Yang, Y. Ci, T. Bu, and Z. Huang, “The ric3
hardware model checker,” in International Conference on
Computer Aided Verification.
Springer, 2025, pp. 185–
199.
[30] D. Beyer, P.-C. Chien, and N.-Z. Lee, “Bridging hardware
and software analysis with btor2c: A word-level-circuit-
to-c translator,” in International Conference on Tools and
Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems.
Springer, 2023, pp. 152–172.
[31] A. Mishchenko, R. Brayton, and N. Een, “Using specula-
tion for sequential equivalence checking,” in Proceedings
of International Workshop on Logic & Synthesis, 2012,
pp. 139–145.
