Combining model checking with simulation-based techniques for
protocol verification
Takanori Ishibashi∗
Kazuhiro Ogata
School of Information Science,
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa, Japan
Abstract
Model checking is a powerful technique for verifying properties of systems or protocols, but
it often suffers from the state space explosion problem. For protocols such as the Alternating
Bit Protocol (ABP) and the Sliding Window Protocol (SWP), increasing parameters such as
channel capacities or window sizes leads to a reachable state space that is infeasible for exhaustive
model checking. To address this, we propose a technique that combines model checking with
simulation relations. We focus on three protocols: the Simple Communication Protocol (SCP),
ABP, and SWP. Formalized as state machines, these protocols are presented in decreasing order
of abstraction: SCP, ABP, and then SWP, which results in a corresponding increase in reachable
states. While SCP is verifiable through direct model checking without state space explosion, the
direct application of model checking to ABP and SWP becomes infeasible as their parameter
values increase. We demonstrate that ABP satisfies its invariant property by combining model
checking on SCP with a simulation relation from ABP to SCP. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
SWP satisfies its invariant property through the composition of simulation relations from SWP
to ABP and from ABP to SCP, in conjunction with model checking on SCP. These approaches
enable the formal verification of protocols with large reachable state spaces by conducting model
checking on a significantly smaller state machine.
1
Introduction
Model checking [1] is a significant achievement in computer science, widely used in the hardware and
software industries. It is very important to verify the correctness of hardware and software systems
to ensure their reliability. Model checking is one of the most advanced techniques for verifying that
a finite-state system satisfies its desired properties. However, model checking has several challenges,
of which state space explosion is the most notorious. It often makes it infeasible to conduct model
checking experiments. Many researchers have addressed this problem and developed a variety of
techniques, such as abstraction [2–9] and partial order reduction [8, 10, 11]. Despite these efforts,
the challenge remains. It is therefore a critical area for further research. While existing automatic
abstraction techniques provide some relief, they often face limitations when dealing with complex
protocol parameters. To address this, we propose a methodology that leverages domain knowledge
to construct simulation relations, enabling more scalable verification.
In this paper, we investigate this issue using three protocols: the Simple Communication Protocol
(SCP) [12], the Alternating Bit Protocol (ABP) [13], and the Sliding Window Protocol (SWP)
∗takanori.ishibashi@jaist.ac.jp
1
arXiv:2607.17453v1  [cs.SE]  20 Jul 2026


[14,15]. Detailed informal descriptions of these protocols are omitted for brevity; readers are referred
to [12–15] for further details. These protocols are characterized by different levels of complexity:
SCP has the highest degree of abstraction and the smallest number of reachable states, while SWP
has the lowest degree of abstraction and the largest number of reachable states. ABP serves as
an intermediate protocol between SCP and SWP in terms of both abstraction and the number of
reachable states. These protocols are selected as a systematic benchmark suite to demonstrate the
scalability of our approach. Direct model checking is feasible for SCP but becomes infeasible for ABP
and SWP due to the state space explosion problem as their parameter values increase. To overcome
this limitation, we propose a technique that combines model checking with simulation relations.
A simulation relation ensures that if invariant properties hold on an abstract state machine, the
corresponding invariant properties are preserved on the more concrete machine.
In this paper,
we focus on invariant properties. Invariant properties are state predicates that hold true in each
initial state and remain true throughout any actions (or state transitions) of systems or protocols,
remaining unchanged regardless of their reachable states (states reachable from an initial state with
zero or more state transitions). We first propose a verification methodology that combines model
checking with simulation relations, enabling the formal verification of protocols that are infeasible
for direct model checking due to state space explosion. We then extend this approach by introducing
a methodology for composing simulation relations, which allows for the formal verification of even
larger and more complex models through hierarchical abstraction.
Based on these verification
methodologies, the main contributions of this study are as follows:
• A methodology that combines model checking with simulation relations to enable the verifica-
tion of systems or protocols where direct model checking fails due to the state space explosion
problem.
• A methodology for the composition of simulation relations, which further extends verification
capabilities to larger models by linking multiple layers of abstraction.
All formal specifications and the Maude commands used for verification are available online
at https://zenodo.org/records/19734839. The primary objective of this study is to determine
whether our proposed method can effectively mitigate the state space explosion problem. To evaluate
this, we address the following two research questions:
• RQ1: Can the problem of being unable to verify that ABP satisfies its invariant property due
to state space explosion be resolved by combining model checking with the simulation relation
between ABP and SCP?
• RQ2: Can the problem of being unable to verify that SWP satisfies its invariant property
due to state space explosion be resolved through the composition of simulation relations,
specifically the simulation relations from SWP to ABP and from ABP to SCP?
By answering these questions, we show that our technique enables the formal verification of
complex protocols with large reachable state spaces that are otherwise beyond the reach of direct
model checking. The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the
foundational concepts required for this study, including state machines, simulation relations, and
the Maude specification language. We use the Bare Communication Protocol (BCP) [12] as an ex-
ample to demonstrate the formalization of protocols in Maude and the application of its commands.
Section 3 presents our two proposed theoretical frameworks: a methodology that combines model
checking with simulation relations and a methodology for the composition of simulation relations.
Section 4 verifies the invariant properties of ABP by applying the methodology that combines model
2


checking with simulation relations. Section 5 verifies the invariant properties of SWP by employing
the composition of simulation relations to establish a hierarchical abstraction. Section 6 mentions
some existing related work. Section 7 concludes the paper including some future directions.
2
Preliminaries
2.1
State machines
Definition 1 (State Machine). A state machine M is ⟨SM, IM, TM⟩such that
• SM is a set of states.
• IM ⊆SM is the set of initial states.
• TM ⊆SM × SM is a binary relation over states. (s, s′) ∈TM may be written as s ⇝M s′,
called a state transition, where s′ is called a successor state of s.
For simplicity of notation, the subscript M is omitted if it is clear from the context that a symbol
refers to the state machine M. ⇝∗
M is the reflexive transitive closure of ⇝M.
Definition 2 (Reachable States). The set RM of reachable states with respect to (wrt) M is defined
as the smallest set satisfying the following conditions:
(i) IM ⊆RM
(ii) If s ∈RM and s ⇝M s′, then s′ ∈RM
Definition 3 (Invariant Property). Let M be a state machine. A state predicate p is an invariant
property wrt M if p(s) is true for all s ∈RM, i.e. (∀s ∈RM)  p(s).
That a state machine satisfies an invariant property is equivalent to saying that a state predicate
is invariant wrt a state machine. A state predicate p can be interpreted as a set PM of states such
that (∀s ∈PM)  p(s) and (∀s /∈PM)  ¬p(s).
2.2
Simulations
A simulation denotes a relation where one program faithfully executes the computational steps of
another, maintaining the same logical sequence despite potential differences [16]. The paper [12]
defines the simulation relation of one state machine to another state machine. A type of state
machine called Observable Transition Systems (OTS) is used for definitions; however, in this paper
we use the state machines defined in the previous subsection, rather than OTS.
Definition 4 (Simulation Relation). Let M and MA be state machines. A relation r : RM ×RMA →
Bool is called a simulation relation from M to MA if it satisfies the following conditions:
(i) For each s ∈IM, there exists sA ∈IMA such that r(s, sA).
(ii) For each s, s′ ∈RM and sA ∈RMA such that r(s, sA) and s ⇝M s′, there exists s′
A ∈RMA
such that r(s′, s′
A) and sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A.
Note that if sA ∈RMA and sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A, then s′
A ∈RMA.
3


Fig 1 shows the diagrams corresponding to the two conditions in Definition 4. When there exists
a simulation relation r from M to MA, we may say that M is simulated by MA, or MA simulates
M. Definition 4 does not say explicitly that for each s ∈RM, there exists sA ∈RMA such that
r(s, sA), and then we need to have the following proposition:
Proposition 1. Let M and MA be state machines. Suppose that M is simulated by MA, that is,
there exists a simulation relation from M to MA. Then, for every such simulation relation r from
M to MA and every state s ∈RM, there exists a state sA ∈RMA such that r(s, sA).
Proof. By induction on s ∈RM. If s ∈IM, then there exists sA ∈RMA such that r(s, sA) from
Definition 4 (i). If s ⇝M s′, then there exists sA ∈RMA such that r(s, sA) from the induction
hypothesis. Then, from Definition 4 (ii), there exists s′
A ∈RMA such that r(s′, s′
A) and sA ⇝∗
MA
s′
A.
Fig 1: A simulation relation r from M to MA.
If M is simulated by MA, a state predicate pA is an invariant property wrt MA and pA is
preserved by the simulation relation, then the counterpart state predicate p is an invariant property
wrt M.
Theorem 1. Let M and MA be state machines, and let p and pA be state predicates. Suppose that M
is simulated by MA. Then, for every such simulation relation r from M to MA, if pA(sA) ⇒p(s)
holds for any states s ∈RM and sA ∈RMA satisfying r(s, sA), the following holds: if pA is an
invariant property wrt MA, then p is an invariant property wrt M.
Proof. For an arbitrary s ∈RM, there exists sA ∈RMA with r(s, sA) from Proposition 1. Therefore,
p(s) holds from the assumption.
2.3
Maude
Maude [17] is a specification and programming language based on rewriting logic. In Maude, func-
tional modules (fmod) define the data of the target system, such as sorts (data types), operators,
and equations. In contrast, system modules (mod) define the system’s transition model by allowing
4


rewrite rules in addition to the declarations used in functional modules. States can be represented
in various forms. In model checking using search command of Maude, we describe a state as a
braced associative-commutative collection of name-value pairs, where each name may include pa-
rameters.
Within the Maude community’s terminology, associative-commutative collections are
referred to as “soup”, and name-value pairs are referred to as “observable components”. Therefore,
a state is expressed as a braced soup of observable components. The juxtaposition operator serves
as the constructor for soups.
Let oc0, oc1, oc2 be observable components; then oc0 oc1 oc2 con-
structs the soup containing these three observable components. Consequently, a state is expressed
as {oc0 oc1 oc2}.
This associative-commutative nature allows Maude to represent complex state
structures flexibly. While Maude’s internal engine handles these structures automatically during
standard model checking, the multiple substitutions resulting from such matching are explicitly ad-
dressed in our simulation-based approach. This necessitates the systematic case splitting discussed
in Section 3.
The state transition relation T is defined using rewrite rules. A standard rewrite rule begins with
the keyword rl, followed by a label enclosed in square brackets, a colon, two patterns separated by
=>, and concludes with a period. In contrast, a conditional rewrite rule, initiated with crl, includes
a condition following the if keyword and ends with a period. An example of a conditional rewrite
rule is
crl [lb] :
t => t′ if c1 /\ . . . /\ cn .
where lb is the rule’s label, and each ci (for i = 1, . . . , n) is a condition, often represented as
an equation tci = tci′. The negation of this equation can be expressed as (tci != tci′) = true,
with the = true part being optional. If the condition c1 /\ . . . /\ cn is satisfied under a certain
substitution σ, then σ(t) can be replaced with σ(t′). The substitution σ is a function from variables
to terms that preserves sorts. The substitution σ can be naturally extended as a function from
terms to terms as follows:
σ
 f(t1, . . . , tn)

= f
 σ(t1), . . . , σ(tn)

for any function symbol f of arity n and terms t1, . . . , tn.
Maude provides lists as one of its predefined container data types. The lists are parameterized,
allowing for the construction of lists of elements of any data type. The basic representation of lists
uses two free constructors: the constant nil for the empty list and the juxtaposition operator for
list construction. For example, when an element E of the same data type as the elements of list L
is added to the front of the list, we denote it as E L.
Maude makes it possible to use fresh constants that represent arbitrary values, thereby enabling
symbolic execution. For example, a fresh constant x of sort Nat represents an arbitrary natural
number.
We describe how to specify a state machine in Maude through the Bare Communication Protocol
(BCP) [12] as an example. To formalize the BCP as a state machine, we use the following observable
components.
• (index:
i) - i is a number. The sender transmits this number to the receiver.
• (list:
l) - l is a list of numbers. The receiver receives numbers from the sender and stores
them in this list.
The initial state init is defined as follows:
{( index: 0) (list: nil)} .
In the initial state, each value is as follows:
5


• The index number is set to 0. This indicates that the sender is prepared to send a message
with the index number 0.
• The list, which the receiver uses to store index numbers received from the sender, is empty
(nil). This indicates that the receiver has not yet received any index numbers.
The BCP is specified by a single rewrite rule send. The rewrite rules use the following Maude
variables:
• OCs denotes a variable of observable components soups.
• I denotes a variable of index.
• L denotes a variable of list.
The rewrite rule send is defined as follows:
crl [send] :
{( index: I) (list: L) OCs} => {( index: s(I)) (list: (I L)) OCs}
if I <= maxIndex .
The rewrite rule specifies that if the index number, denoted as I, is less than or equal to the
predefined maxIndex, the index is incremented by 1 (s(I)) and the index is added to the list ((I
L)). maxIndex is a natural number.
It is used to limit the reachable state space during model
checking.
The invariant property candidate of BCP is defined in Maude as follows:
eq BCP -inv(BCP) = mk(getIndex(BCP)) = (getIndex(BCP) getList(BCP)) .
BCP-inv ensures that the protocol’s state remains consistent and correct. Letting BCP denote the
protocol’s state, BCP-inv is defined such that mk(getIndex(BCP)) is equal to (getIndex(BCP)
getList(BCP)). mk takes a natural number k and makes the list (k k −1 . . . 0). The functions
prefixed with get, including getIndex and getList, serve as accessors to extract the index and list
components, respectively, from the state. We define a constructor bcp for the data type BCPState,
which takes two arguments for index and list, to pass the protocol state as an argument to
functions evaluating invariant property candidates and simulation relation candidates. For instance,
getList(bcp(index, list)) returns list. For other communication protocols in this paper, we
define states in the same manner.
For model checking, Maude provides the search command, which looks for states that are
reachable from an initial state through state transitions, aiming to find states that meet a certain
condition. To verify that BCP satisfies its invariant property BCP-inv, the following command is
executed:
search [1] in BCP : init =>* {( index: I) (list: L) OCs}
such that not BCP -inv(bcp(I, L)) .
Maude returns No solution. This means that the invariant property holds throughout all reachable
states of the protocol.
The reduce (or red) command is used for term evaluation, simplifying a specified term using
the function defined in a module. We will use the function mk, which was used within the function
known as BCP-inv, as a concrete example. We define the function mk in the module N-LIST, which
implements lists of natural numbers, as follows:
eq mk(0) = 0 nil .
eq mk(s(X)) = s(X) mk(X) .
6


s represents the successor function of natural numbers. We use Maude to reduce mk(3) by using
the following red command:
red in N-LIST : mk(3) .
Maude returns 3 2 1 0. This means that mk(3) is reduced to 3 2 1 0.
Finally, the srewrite (or srew) command identifies successor states by applying a specific rewrite
rule to a given state. We use following the srew command, as a concrete example.
srew in BCP : init
using
send .
This srew command applies the rewrite rule send to the initial state init. The srew command
identifies {index: 1 list: 0} as the successor state. This means that the initial state init moves
to the state {index: 1 list: 0} by an application of the rewrite rule send to the initial state.
3
Proposed verification methodologies
3.1
Combining model checking with simulation relations
The methodology combining model checking with simulation relations employs model checking to
demonstrate that a state machine M is simulated by a more abstract state machine MA. It further
shows that, if M is simulated by MA and a state predicate pA is an invariant property wrt MA, then
the corresponding state predicate p is an invariant property wrt M. To prove that p is an invariant
property wrt M using the methodology for the state machines M and MA, and their respective
state predicates p and pA, we follow three steps:
1. Conduct model checking to verify that pA is an invariant property wrt MA.
2. Conjecture a simulation relation candidate r from M to MA, and prove that p can be deduced
from pA assuming the simulation relation candidate r using static case splitting on data
structures and reduction.
3. Demonstrate that M is simulated by MA using transition-based case splitting over rewrite
rules, model checking, and reduction.
Fig 2 provides a comprehensive overview of the proposed methodology. The figure illustrates the
process of verifying an invariant property p of M by leveraging MA and a simulation relation r. As
shown in the workflow, the verification is structured into three steps. By following these steps, we
can formally verify that p is an invariant property wrt M even though it is infeasible to directly
model check that p is an invariant property wrt M. This is useful when M has a large reachable
state space that leads to state space explosion. MA must have a reachable state space that does not
lead to state space explosion. If we successfully carry out steps 1 through 3, then we can conclude
that p is an invariant property wrt M from Theorem 1. In the case studies of this paper, MA is
manually constructed and is not automatically generated from M.
We design the technique in step 3 to satisfy Definition 4. We define the simulation relation
candidate r with an equation in Maude. r takes two states of M and MA respectively as arguments
and returns a Boolean value. It returns true if r holds between the two states, and false otherwise.
To demonstrate that Definition 4 (i) holds, we verify that for each s ∈IM, there exists sA ∈IMA
such that r(s, sA). To do this, we use the red command of Maude. Specifically, human users are
supposed to construct an initial state sA of MA or choose sA from IA for each s of I and use the
following command:
red in SIM : r(s, sA).
7


Fig 2: Overview of the proposed methodology for combining model checking with sim-
ulation relations to verify invariant properties.
where SIM is the module in which r is defined and then the formal specifications of M and MA
in Maude are available. Note that it is straightforward to construct an initial state sA of MA or
choose sA from IA for each s of I. This command returns a Boolean value. For each s ∈IM, if this
command returns true, we can conclude that Definition 4 (i) is satisfied. Assuming that MA has
a reachable state space that does not lead to state space explosion, IA consists of a small number
of initial states. It is usually very small. For example, all case studies in this paper involve state
machines with exactly one initial state.
Next, we describe the technique for demonstrating that Definition 4 (ii) holds. This technique
requires transition-based case splitting for each state transition of M. Ordinary finite-state model
checking usually uses specific concrete values.
However, since we aim to demonstrate that the
simulation relation is preserved across all state transitions of M with a large reachable state space,
where state space explosion occurs, we use fresh constants in addition to concrete values.
We verify that for each state transition of M, for arbitrary states s, s′ of M, and an arbitrary
state sA of MA such that r(s, sA) and s ⇝M s′, there exists a state s′
A of MA such that r(s′, s′
A) and
sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A. In Maude, state transitions are defined by rewrite rules. As described in the Section 2,
rewrite rules are defined in two ways: as a rewrite rule (rl) and a conditional rewrite rule (crl).
• rl [lb] :
t => t′
• crl [lb] :
t => t′ if . . . /\ ci /\ . . .
If the t’ in rl or crl contains an if_then_else_fi expression, a conditional branch occurs. De-
pending on the condition, different state transitions may occur. We need to do case splitting for
(conditional) rewrite rules of M. In the case studies of this paper, we use case splitting based on
the conditions of the conditional rewrite rules and the conditions specified in the if_then_else_fi
8


expression, ensuring that all possible state transitions of M can be taken into account. In addition
to these cases, other types of case splitting may also be required. For example, when using asso-
ciative commutative pattern matching, multiple substitutions may be obtained, requiring further
case splitting based on these substitutions. An arbitrary state before a state transition, caused by
a single application of a rewrite rule, corresponds to σ(t), and an arbitrary state after the state
transition, caused by the same application of the same rewrite rule, corresponds to σ(t′), where
σ(t), σ(t′) ∈SM and σ(t) ⇝M σ(t′). Since reachability is, in general, undecidable, it is not feasible
to restrict the proof directly to the set of reachable states RM. Therefore, we introduce a super-
set DM such that RM ⊆DM ⊆SM. Correspondingly, we introduce a superset DMA such that
RMA ⊆DMA ⊆SMA to serve as the counterpart. We carry out the proof over DM and DMA. To
ensure the soundness of this approach, we establish that verifying the state transition condition over
these supersets (DM and DMA) serves as a sufficient condition for satisfying Definition 4 (ii) over
the original reachable states (RM and RMA). This theoretical foundation is formally provided by
the following lemma:
Lemma 1. The logical formula
(∀s ∈DM)(∀s′ ∈DM)(∀sA ∈DMA)(∃s′
A ∈DMA)
(r(s, sA) ∧(s, s′) ∈TM) ⇒(r(s′, s′
A) ∧sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A)
(1)
is a sufficient condition for the logical formula
(∀s ∈RM)(∀s′ ∈RM)(∀sA ∈RMA)(∃s′
A ∈RMA)
(r(s, sA) ∧(s, s′) ∈TM) ⇒(r(s′, s′
A) ∧sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A).
(2)
Proof. Assume that the logical formula (1) holds. Since RM ⊆DM and RMA ⊆DMA, the following
holds.
(∀s ∈RM)(∀s′ ∈RM)(∀sA ∈RMA)(∃s′
A ∈DMA)
(r(s, sA) ∧(s, s′) ∈TM) ⇒(r(s′, s′
A) ∧sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A)
(3)
We show that the logical formula (3) implies the logical formula (2).
(i) If (r(s, sA) ∧(s, s′) ∈TM) is false, the implication (r(s, sA) ∧(s, s′) ∈TM) ⇒(r(s′, s′
A) ∧
sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A) is satisfied. The logical formula (2) holds.
(ii) If (r(s, sA) ∧(s, s′) ∈TM) is true, there exists s′
A ∈DMA such that r(s′, s′
A) ∧sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A.
Since sA ∈RMA and sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A, it follows that s′
A ∈RMA from Definition 2. The logical
formula (2) holds.
Hence, in both cases, the logical formula (2) is satisfied whenever the logical formula (1) holds.
Therefore, The logical formula (1) is a sufficient condition for the logical formula (2).
This lemma allows us to reason soundly about reachable states by performing verification over
their respective supersets. To implement this verification in Maude, we execute a three-command
procedure for each rewrite rule of M.
First, we find the states resulting from the state transition caused by the application of the
rewrite rule using the srew command of Maude. Specifically, we use the following command:
srew in M : σ(t) using lb .
9


where M is the name of the module defining the state machine M, and lb is the label of the rewrite
rule. This srew command finds σ(t′) that is reachable from σ(t) in M by applying the rewrite rule
lb. σ(t) is the term that represents the most general state for each case in the case splitting. We
construct σ(t) using fresh constants. By performing the exhaustive case splitting, we ensure that the
collection of these terms σ(t) effectively covers the entire state space, representing the most general
state possible for every transition branch. This comprehensive coverage is essential to guarantee
that no potential state transition is overlooked during the verification process. For example, if t
has associativity or commutativity, multiple substitutions can be obtained. It can be observed that
when multiple substitutions are obtained, further case splitting is required. The point at which the
srew command is applied is shown as command (i) in Fig 3. This command helps to find σ(t′)
required to demonstrate Definition 4 (ii).
Fig 3: Verification of simulation relation for each state transition.
Next, we verify that sA ∈DMA corresponding to s ∈DM has r using the red command of
Maude. Specifically, human users are supposed to construct a state sA of MA for each s of M and
use the following command:
red in SIM : r(σ(t), σ(tA)) .
where SIM is the name of the module defining the simulation relation candidate r with an equation.
There are separate modules defining the states of M and MA, both of which are imported by the
module SIM. This red command returns a Boolean value. If the command returns true, there is
r between σ(t) and σ(tA). As with σ(t), we use fresh constants to represent σ(tA). We construct
a candidate σ(tA) that is expected to hold the r with σ(t), and use the command to verify that
r holds between σ(t) and σ(tA). The point at which the reduce command is applied is shown as
command (ii) in Fig 3.
Finally, we verify that zero or more state transitions make it possible to move sA to s′
A such
that the search command is used to confirm that r(s′, s′
A) holds. Specifically, we use the following
command:
search [1] in MA : σ(tA) =>* σ(t′
A) such that r(σ(t′), σ(t′
A)) .
where MA is the name of the module defining the state machine MA. The module MA imports the
module SIM. Therefore, r can be used in the module MA. If this command returns a solution, it
10


indicates that there exists s′
A ∈DMA such that r(s′, s′
A) and sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A. The point at which the
search command is applied is shown as command (iii) in Fig 3.
By the execution of our three-command procedure for each state transition caused by the rewrite
rules of M, we can verify that the following condition holds: for each state transition of M, for
arbitrary states s, s′ of M, and an arbitrary state sA of MA such that r(s, sA) and s ⇝M s′, there
exists a state s′
A of MA such that r(s′, s′
A) and sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A. This can be expressed in a logical
formula as follows:
(∀s ∈DM)(∀s′ ∈DM)(∀sA ∈DMA)(∃s′
A ∈DMA)
(r(s, sA) ∧(s, s′) ∈TM) ⇒(r(s′, s′
A) ∧sA ⇝∗
MA s′
A)
By combining this verification result with Lemma 1, we can formally conclude that Definition 4
(ii) is satisfied. Specifically, since Lemma 1 ensures that the satisfaction of formula (1) over the
supersets is a sufficient condition for formula (2), the successful execution of our three-command
procedure confirms that the state machine M is simulated by MA.
We have described the technique in step 3 for verifying whether both conditions of Definition 4
are satisfied. If both conditions of Definition 4 are satisfied, then M is simulated by MA.
While this methodology provides a robust framework for verification using a single simulation
relation, it can be further extended to address the challenges of verifying even larger and more
complex systems. In the following subsection, we introduce a methodology for the composition of
simulation relations, which enables hierarchical verification by linking multiple layers of abstraction
to further mitigate the state space explosion problem.
3.2
Composition of simulation relations from state machines to state machines
To address cases where a single layer of abstraction is insufficient, we further extend Section 3.1
by introducing a methodology for the composition of simulation relations. Let M, MA, and MB be
state machines with increasing levels of abstraction and smaller reachable state spaces. Let p, pA,
and pB be their respective state predicates, and let r1 and r2 be the simulation relation candidates
from M to MA and from MA to MB, respectively. Here, we assume that the reachable state space
of MB is of a size that allows for model checking that pB is an invariant property wrt MB, and
that both M and MA have large reachable state spaces, leading to state space explosion, making it
infeasible to directly conduct model checking that p is an invariant property wrt M and that pA is
an invariant property wrt MA. To prove that p is an invariant property wrt M, we follow five steps:
1. Conduct model checking to verify that pB is an invariant property wrt MB.
2. Conjecture a simulation relation candidate r2 from MA to MB, and prove that pA can be
deduced from pB assuming the simulation relation candidate r2 using static case splitting on
data structures and reduction.
3. Demonstrate that MA is simulated by MB using transition-based case splitting over rewrite
rules, model checking, and reduction.
4. Conjecture a simulation relation candidate r from M to MA, and prove that p can be deduced
from pA assuming the simulation relation candidate r1 using static case splitting on data
structures and reduction.
5. Demonstrate that M is simulated by MA using transition-based case splitting over rewrite
rules, model checking, and reduction.
11


By following the steps, we can formally verify that p is an invariant property wrt M even though
it is infeasible to directly conduct model checking that p is an invariant property wrt M and that
pA is an invariant property wrt MA. This is useful when M and MA have a large reachable state
space that leads to state space explosion. From steps 1, 2, and 3, it follows that pA is an invariant
property wrt MA. This approach is consistent with the methodology described in the Section 3.1.
From the fact that pA is an invariant property wrt MA, and from steps 4 and 5, it follows that p is
an invariant property wrt M.
4
Case study I: The Alternating Bit Protocol (ABP)
This section demonstrates the application of our methodology to verify that the Alternating Bit
Protocol (ABP) satisfies its desired invariant property. To address RQ1, we establish a simulation
relation from ABP to the more abstract Simple Communication Protocol (SCP) and leverage model
checking on SCP to overcome the state space explosion problem.
We first provide the formal
specifications of both protocols before detailing the three-step verification process.
4.1
Formal specification of the Alternating Bit Protocol (ABP)
The Alternating Bit Protocol (ABP) is a communication protocol designed to provide reliable com-
munication between a sender and a receiver, even when the underlying channels duplicate or drop
messages. The protocol architecture consists of a sender process, a receiver process, and two unreli-
able first-in, first-out (FIFO) channels: queue1 for data messages and queue2 for acknowledgments.
To maintain the communication state, the sender stores a Boolean variable bit1 and a natural
number index, while the receiver maintains a Boolean variable bit2 and a natural number list
list. The protocol logic proceeds through the following four corresponding steps:
1. The sender transmits a data message containing its current bit1 and index to the receiver
via queue1.
2. Upon receiving a message from queue1, the receiver compares the message bit with its expected
bit2. If they match, it appends the index to the list, toggles its bit2, and prepares for the
acknowledgment; otherwise, it discards the message as a duplicate.
3. The receiver transmits an acknowledgment message containing its current bit2 back to the
sender via queue2.
4. Upon receiving an acknowledgment from queue2, the sender compares the acknowledgment bit
with its bit1. If the bit confirms successful delivery, the sender toggles its bit1 and prepares
the next index for transmission; otherwise, it continues retransmitting the current message.
This entire flow, built around the alternating bit, ensures reliable communication even if the under-
lying channels duplicate or drop messages and their acknowledgment messages.
To formalize the ABP as a state machine, we use the following observable components.
• (index:
i) - i is a number. The sender transmits this number to the receiver.
• (list:
l) - l is a list of numbers. The receiver receives numbers from the sender and stores
them in this list.
• (queue1:
q1) - q1 is a queue for cell1 messages, which consist of a pair containing a Boolean
value and an index number. The message, encapsulated by the data type PCell, is dispatched
by the sender to the receiver. If queue1 is empty, q1 is set to nil.
12


• (queue2:
q2) - q2 is a queue for cell2 messages, which contains a Boolean value.
The
message, encapsulated by the data type BCell, is transmitted from the receiver back to the
sender. If queue2 is empty, q2 is set to nil.
• (bit1:
b1) - b1 is a Boolean value that the sender maintains.
• (bit2:
b2) - b2 is a Boolean value that the receiver maintains.
The initial state is defined as follows:
{( index: 0) (list: nil) (queue1: nil)
(queue2: nil) (bit1: false) (bit2: false)} .
In the initial state, each value is as follows:
• The index number is set to 0. This indicates that the sender is prepared to dispatch a cell1
message with the index number 0.
• The list, which the receiver uses to store index numbers received from the sender, is empty
(nil). This indicates that the receiver has not yet received any index numbers.
• The queue1 is empty (nil). This indicates that either the sender has not yet sent any cell1
messages, the receiver has already received all cell1 messages sent by the sender, or all cell1
messages have been dropped. In the initial state, this condition refers to the case where no
cell1 messages have been sent.
• The queue2 is empty (nil). This indicates that either the receiver has not yet sent any cell2
messages, the sender has received all cell2 messages from the receiver, or all cell2 messages have
been dropped. In the initial state, this condition refers to the case where no cell2 messages
have been sent.
• bit1 is set to false, indicating the initial Boolean state for transmission control from the
sender.
• bit2 is also set to false, indicating the initial Boolean state for acknowledgments from the
receiver.
The ABP is specified as eight rewrite rules: send1, rec1, send2, rec2, drop1, dup1, drop2, and
dup2. The rewrite rules use the following Maude variables:
• OCs denotes a variable of observable components soups.
• I denotes a variable of index.
• L denotes a variable of list.
• PQ denotes a variable of queue1.
• BQ denotes a variable of queue2.
• PC denotes a variable of an element in queue1.
• BC denotes a variable of an element in queue2.
• B, B1, and B2 denote variables of bit1 or bit2.
13


The rewrite rule send1 is defined as follows:
crl [send1] :
{( queue1: PQ) (bit1: B) (index: I) OCs} =>
{( queue1: (PQ pcell(B, I))) (bit1: B) (index: I) OCs}
if I <= maxIndex /\ length(PQ) <= maxQueueLength .
The rewrite rule specifies that if the index number, denoted as I, is less than or equal to the pre-
defined maxIndex, and the length of queue1, denoted as PQ is less than or equal to the predefined
maxQueueLength, the message pcell(B, I) is appended to the end of queue1. This message encap-
sulates both the Boolean value (B) and the index number (I). Both maxIndex and maxQueueLength
are natural numbers. They are used to limit the reachable state space during model checking. This
limitation is similarly applied in other rewrite rules.
The rewrite rule rec1 is defined as follows:
rl [rec1] :
{( queue2: (BC BQ)) (bit1: B) (index: I) OCs} =>
{( queue2: BQ)
(bit1: (if bit(BC) = B then B else not B fi))
(index: (if bit(BC) = B then I else s(I) fi)) OCs} .
The rewrite rule specifies that if the cell2 message queue is not empty (indicating the existence of
awaiting cell2 messages within queue2), the sender processes the top cell2 message from this queue.
If the bit1 maintained by the sender does not equal the bit contained in cell2 at the front of the
queue2, bit1 is toggled (not B), and the index is incremented by 1 (s(I)). Otherwise, both the
bit1 and the index remain unchanged. The message at the front of queue2 is removed.
The rewrite rule send2 is defined as follows:
crl [send2] :
{( queue2: BQ) (bit2: B) OCs} =>
{( queue2: (BQ bcell(B))) (bit2: B) OCs}
if length(BQ) <= maxQueueLength .
The rewrite rule specifies that if the length of queue2, denoted as BQ is less than or equal to the
predefined maxQueueLength, the message bcell(B) is appended to the end of queue2. This message
contains the Boolean value (B).
The rewrite rule rec2 is defined as follows:
rl [rec2] :
{( queue1: (PC PQ)) (bit2: B) (list: L) OCs} =>
{( queue1: PQ)
(bit2: (if bit(PC) = B then not B else B fi))
(list: (if bit(PC) = B then (index(PC) L) else L fi)) OCs} .
The rewrite rule specifies that if the cell1 message queue is not empty (indicating the existence
of awaiting cell1 messages within queue1), the receiver processes the top cell1 message from this
queue. If the bit2 maintained by the receiver equals the bit contained in cell1 at the front of the
queue1, bit2 is toggled (not B), and the index is added to the list ((index(PC) L)). Otherwise,
both the bit2 and the list remain unchanged. The message at the front of queue1 is removed.
The rewrite rule drop1 is defined as follows:
rl [drop1] :
{( queue1: (PC PQ)) OCs} => {( queue1: PQ) OCs} .
The rewrite rule specifies that if the cell1 message queue is not empty, the message at the front of
queue1 is removed.
The rewrite rule dup1 is defined as follows:
14


crl [dup1] :
{( queue1: (PC PQ)) OCs} => {( queue1: (PC PC PQ)) OCs}
if length(PQ) <= maxQueueLength .
The rewrite rule specifies that if the cell1 message queue is not empty, and the length of queue1
is less than or equal to the predefined maxQueueLength, the message at the front of queue1 is
duplicated.
Similarly, drop2 and dup2 are defined for queue2 in the same manner as drop1 and dup1 for
queue1; therefore, they are omitted to avoid redundancy.
The invariant property candidate of ABP is defined in Maude as follows:
eq ABP -inv(ABP) =
(getBit1(ABP) = getBit2(ABP) implies
mk(getIndex(ABP)) = (getIndex(ABP) getList(ABP))) and
(getBit1(ABP) != getBit2(ABP) implies
mk(getIndex(ABP)) = getList(ABP)) .
ABP-inv ensures that the protocol’s state remains consistent and correct.
ABP-inv is defined
such that if getBit1(ABP) (the sender’s bit) is equal to getBit2(ABP) (the receiver’s bit), then
mk(getIndex(ABP)) is equal to (getIndex(ABP) getList(ABP)), and if getBit1(ABP) is not equal
to getBit2(ABP), then mk(getIndex(ABP)) is equal to getList(ABP).
4.2
Formal specification of the Simple Communication Protocol (SCP)
The Simple Communication Protocol (SCP) is a more abstract version of ABP, where the primary
distinction lies in the communication channels. While ABP uses queues to handle multiple mes-
sages, SCP uses two unreliable cells, cell1 and cell2, which can be viewed as queues with a fixed
capacity of one. In ABP, the number of reachable states grows exponentially as parameters such
as maxQueueLength increase, often leading to the state space explosion problem. In contrast, by
abstracting the communication channels into single-capacity cells, SCP inherently limits the com-
plexity of the system’s state configurations. As a result, the total number of reachable states in SCP
is considerably smaller than that in ABP, making direct model checking feasible and efficient with-
out encountering state space explosion. Due to the structural similarity between the two protocols,
we define SCP by referring to the ABP specification described in the previous section as follows:
• Observable Components: The definitions for index, list, bit1, and bit2, along with their
corresponding Maude variables, are identical to those in ABP. The only structural difference
is that queue1 and queue2 in ABP are replaced by cell1 and cell2 in SCP, respectively.
• Initial State: The initial state of SCP follows the same logic as ABP, with both cell1 and
cell2 initialized to empty.
• Rewrite Rules: SCP is specified by six rewrite rules: send1, rec1, send2, rec2, drop1,
and drop2. These rules are operationally analogous to the corresponding rules in ABP, but
operate on a single-capacity buffer.
• Omission of Duplication Rewrite Rules: Unlike ABP, SCP does not include dup1 or
dup2, as the single-capacity buffer does not support message duplication in this model.
For instance, we present the rewrite rule send2 in SCP as a representative example of this
simplification:
15


rl [send2] :
{( cell2: BC) (bit2: B) OCs} =>
{( cell2: bcell(B)) (bit2: B) OCs} .
The rewrite rule specifies that the message containing B is put into cell2. In ABP, the corresponding
send2 rule is a conditional rewrite rule (crl) that includes a guard condition to ensure that the
current queue length does not exceed a predefined maxQueueLength.
In contrast, because SCP
models the channel as a single-element cell, this capacity check is eliminated, and the rewrite rule
becomes an unconditional rewrite rule (rl). To avoid redundancy, we omit the detailed descriptions
of other SCP rules, such as send1 or rec1, as they follow an analogous modification pattern.
The invariant property candidate of SCP is defined in Maude as follows:
eq SCP -inv(SCP) =
(getBit1(SCP) = getBit2(SCP) implies
mk(getIndex(SCP)) = (getIndex(SCP) getList(SCP))) and
(getBit1(SCP) != getBit2(SCP) implies
mk(getIndex(SCP)) = getList(SCP)) .
SCP-inv is defined using the same logical structure as ABP-inv. SCP-inv ensures that the pro-
tocol’s state remains consistent and correct. Similarly to ABP-inv, SCP-inv is defined such that
if getBit1(SCP) is equal to getBit2(SCP), then mk(getIndex(SCP)) is equal to (getIndex(SCP)
getList(SCP)), and if getBit1(SCP) is not equal to getBit2(SCP), then mk(getIndex(SCP)) is
equal to getList(SCP).
4.3
Verification Results
In this section, we demonstrate that ABP satisfies its invariant property, ABP-inv, by leveraging the
abstract model SCP and the simulation relation established between the two protocols. Following
the three-step methodology illustrated in Fig 2, we first conduct model checking on the abstract
state machine, SCP (Step 1).
4.3.1
Step 1: Verification of Invariant Property on SCP
In this verification, we set the parameter to maxIndex = 64. We can check whether SCP satisfies
the invariant property candidate, SCP-inv, or not by using the following search command:
search [1] in SCP : init =>*
{( bit1: B1) (bit2: B2) (index: I) (list: L) OCs}
such that not SCP -inv(scp(B1 , I, B2 , L)) .
Maude returns No solution. The result No solution formally verifies that SCP-inv holds through-
out all reachable states of the protocol.
4.3.2
Step 2: Deducibility of ABP-inv from SCP-inv
We conjecture a simulation relation candidate r2 from ABP to SCP. This simulation relation can-
didate requires that if SCP-inv is an invariant property wrt SCP and ABP is simulated by SCP,
then ABP-inv is an invariant property wrt ABP. The simulation relation candidate from ABP to
SCP is defined as follows:
eq r2(ABP , SCP) =
(getBit1(ABP) = getBit1(SCP)) and
(getBit2(ABP) = getBit2(SCP)) and
(getIndex(ABP) = getIndex(SCP)) and
(getList(ABP) = getList(SCP)) .
16


This demonstrates that bit1, bit2, index, and list are equivalent in ABP and SCP. The parame-
ter ABP is defined as a value of the data type ABPState, which represents the state of the Alternating
Bit Protocol. Similarly, the parameter SCP is defined as a value of the data type SCPState, repre-
senting the state of the Simple Communication Protocol. Note that r2 omits the contents of the
communication channels, as they are not required to deduce ABP-inv from SCP-inv. This mapping
is sufficient because both invariant properties depend only on the sender and receiver’s local states.
We demonstrate that if SCP-inv is an invariant property wrt SCP and ABP is simulated by
SCP, then ABP-inv is an invariant property wrt ABP. We confirm this using the following function.
eq ABP2SCP -sim(ABP , SCP) =
r2(ABP , SCP) implies (SCP -inv(SCP) implies ABP -inv(ABP)) .
We describe the proof of SCP-inv(sSCP ) ⇒ABP-inv(sABP ) for arbitrary states sSCP , sABP
with r2(sABP , sSCP ). Considering the simulation relation candidate and the invariant property,
the cases can be divided as follows.
1. r2 is true, SCP-inv is true, and bit1 is equal to bit2.
2. r2 is true, SCP-inv is true, and bit1 is different from bit2.
3. r2 is true, SCP-inv is false, and bit1 is equal to bit2.
4. r2 is true, SCP-inv is false, and bit1 is different from bit2.
5. r2 is false.
The module and the corresponding red command for case 2 are provided below:
fmod
SIM_ABP2SCP_02 is
pr SIM .
ops b1 b2 b3 b4 : -> Bool+ .
ops i1 i2 : -> Nat+ .
ops l1 l2 : -> List{Nat+} .
eq (b1 = b2) = false .
eq (b1 = b3) = true .
eq (b2 = b4) = true .
eq (b3 = b4) = false .
eq (i1 =Nat+ i2) = true .
eq l1 = mk(i1) .
eq l2 = mk(i2) .
eq (mk(i1) = mk(i2)) = true .
endfm
As shown in the module SIM_ABP2SCP_02, we introduce several fresh constants. In this context,
Nat+ and Bool+ are data types used to represent arbitrary natural numbers and Boolean values,
respectively, enabling the symbolic verification of each case.
red in SIM_ABP2SCP_02 :
ABP2SCP -sim(abp(pqueue , bqueue , b1 , i1 , b2 , l1),
scp(pcell , bcell , b3 , i2 , b4 , l2)) .
The constants b1, b2, b3, and b4 represent arbitrary Boolean values, and i1 and i2 denote arbi-
trary natural numbers. Similarly, l1 and l2 represent arbitrary lists of natural numbers. For the
communication channels in ABP, pqueue and bqueue represent arbitrary values for the message
17


queues from the sender to the receiver and from the receiver to the sender, respectively. For the cor-
responding cells in SCP, pcell and bcell represent arbitrary values from the sender to the receiver
and from the receiver to the sender, respectively. This red command returns true. Although case
2 is presented here as a representative demonstration, all other cases listed above were similarly
verified using red command. All cases yielded the result true, thereby formally establishing the
deducibility of ABP-inv from SCP-inv under the simulation relation r2.
4.3.3
Step 3: Demonstration of Simulation Relation from ABP to SCP
First, we verify Definition 4 (i) is satisfied. we confirm that the simulation relation holds between
the initial states of ABP and SCP as follows:
red in SIM :
r2(abp(nil , nil , false , 0, false , nil),
scp(empty , empty , false , 0, false , nil)) .
Maude returns true for this red command. This means that the simulation relation r2 holds between
the initial states of ABP and SCP.
To verify that Definition 4 (ii) is satisfied, we apply the verification procedure consisting of
Maude commands (i), (ii), and (iii) as depicted in Fig 3 to each rewrite rule of ABP. This process
involves case splitting for each of the eight rewrite rules to ensure that all potential transitions are
formally accounted for. The full set of these generated cases and the corresponding Maude code
are publicly available in our repository. For illustrative purposes, we present the verification of the
send2 rule as a representative example.
Before executing the commands, we define the representative concrete state (sABP ) and its
corresponding abstract state (sSCP ) using fresh constants to ensure the generality of the verification.
Let sABP be the ABP state for this case:
{( queue1: pqueue) (queue2: bqueue) (bit1: bool)
(index: index) (bit2: bool) (list: list)}
The corresponding SCP state, sSCP , is constructed as follows:
{( cell1: pcell) (cell2: bcell) (bit1: bool)
(index: index) (bit2: bool) (list: list)}
In these terms, pqueue, bqueue, pcell, bcell, bool, index, and list are fresh constants represent-
ing arbitrary values. While index is constrained to be less than or equal to maxIndex, the remaining
constants represent unconstrained and arbitrary values.
The procedure begins with command (i), where the srew command is applied to sABP to iden-
tify the successor state in ABP. Maude identifies a single successor state s′
ABP resulting from the
application of the send2 rule:
{( queue1: pqueue) (queue2: (bqueue
bcell(bool))) (bit1: bool)
(index: index) (bit2: bool) (list: list)}
Next, in command (ii), we verify that the simulation relation r2 holds between the states sABP
and sSCP by executing a red command. Maude evaluates this command to true, confirming that
the simulation relation r2 holds between sABP and sSCP .
Finally, we execute command (iii) to search for a state s′
SCP in SCP that preserves the simulation
relation with s′
ABP in zero or more steps. Specifically, we use a search command to find a state
transition from sSCP to a state that satisfies r2(s′
ABP , s′
SCP ). Maude successfully finds a solution
for this search, thereby identifying a valid state transition in the abstract model that corresponds
to the concrete state transition.
18


These collective results demonstrate that, for all state transitions induced by the send2 rule in
ABP, there exist corresponding transitions in SCP that preserve the simulation relation. By ex-
haustively applying this three-command procedure to the remaining seven rewrite rules, we formally
confirm that the state transition condition in Definition 4 (ii) is fully satisfied for ABP.
4.3.4
Summary of Verification
Through the successful execution of Steps 1, 2, and 3, we have formally demonstrated that the
invariant property SCP-inv holds for SCP, that ABP-inv is logically deducible from SCP-inv under
the simulation relation r2, and that ABP is simulated by SCP. Based on Theorem 1, these results
collectively prove that the invariant property ABP-inv holds for ABP.
4.4
Discussion
We conducted the experiments described in this paper on a computer equipped with a 3.3 GHz
microprocessor and 32 GB of memory. Maude 3.3.1 was used for verification across all case studies.
Table 1 summarizes the performance comparison between direct model checking and our pro-
posed methodology. To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach (RQ1), we first attempted di-
rect model checking on the ABP state machine.
With parameters set to maxIndex = 64 and
maxQueueLength = 32, the process failed to conclude. Preliminary tests indicated that the verifica-
tion time increases sharply as these parameters grow. The chosen values represent a configuration
where state space explosion renders exhaustive direct model checking infeasible within a reasonable
timeframe, effectively highlighting the practical boundaries of conventional methods. We deliber-
ately terminated the verification after one hour, judging that state space explosion rendered direct
model checking infeasible within a practical timeframe.
Table 1: Performance comparison of verification methods for ABP (maxIndex = 64, maxQueue-
Length = 32).
Verification Method
Step
Maude Command
Time
Result
Direct Model Checking
-
search
> 3,600 s
Timeout (Failed)
Proposed Methodology
Step 1
search (on SCP)
< 1 s
Verified
Step 2
red
< 1 s
Verified
Step 3
srew, red, search
< 1 s
Verified
In contrast, our proposed methodology completed the entire verification process with minimal
computational overhead.
Specifically, Steps 1, 2, and 3 each finished in less than one second.
The high efficiency of Step 1 with maxIndex = 64 is attributed to the significantly reduced state
space of SCP, which abstracts queues into single-capacity cells. Furthermore, since Steps 2 and 3
rely on symbolic execution with fresh constants rather than exhaustive state space traversal, their
execution times remain sub-second and independent of the parameter sizes that typically cause
state space explosion. These results provide a definitive affirmative answer to RQ1, proving that
our methodology can mitigate the state space explosion problem in ABP effectively.
While our methodology effectively mitigates the state space explosion problem, it introduces
the requirement for manual abstraction and the definition of simulation relations. To minimize this
burden, we developed a support tool [18]. By automating the case splitting arising from associative
commutative pattern matching and the execution of the three-command sequence (srew, red, and
search) in step 3, the tool reduces the risk of human error and ensures that the verification process
remains rigorous. The tool is publicly available [18].
19


5
Case study II: The Sliding Window Protocol (SWP)
This section demonstrates the formal verification of the Sliding Window Protocol (SWP) to address
RQ2. To overcome this, we employ the composition of simulation relations as established in Sec-
tion 3.2. Specifically, we prove that SWP satisfies its invariant property by establishing a simulation
relation from SWP to ABP and composing it with the previously verified simulation from ABP to
SCP . This hierarchical approach allows us to deduce the correctness of SWP from the abstract
SCP invariant property through the intermediate ABP model.
5.1
Formal specification of the Sliding Window Protocol (SWP)
The Sliding Window Protocol (SWP) is a fundamental method for reliable and sequential data
transmission over a communication channel. This protocol works by allowing the sender to transmit
multiple messages before receiving an acknowledgement from the receiver, effectively managing
the flow of data. This protocol has a window mechanism where the window size is the number
of messages that can be sent without an acknowledgement. There are differences between SWP
and ABP. In SWP, the sender can send messages up to the window size without waiting for an
acknowledgement from the receiver. On the other hand, in ABP, the sender needs to wait for an
acknowledgement from the receiver before sending each message.
To maintain conciseness and clarity, we define the formal specification of SWP by highlighting
its extensions and differences compared to the ABP model described in Section 4.1.
• Observable Components: While the basic communication structure involving index, list,
and unreliable channels (queue1, queue2) remain the same, SWP introduces several compo-
nents to manage its window mechanism. These include seq (the current sequence number),
windowCount (the number of unacknowledged frames), expectedFrameSeq (the next sequence
number the receiver expects), and expectedAckSeq (the next acknowledgment the sender
expects).
• Maude Variables: In the formalization of SWP, the variables OCs (observable components),
I (index), and L (list) are identical to those used in the ABP specification. However, other
variables are uniquely defined for SWP to reflect its specific data structures, such as FQ and
AQ for the queues, and S, C, F, and A for managing sequence numbers and window counts.
• Initial State: The initial state of SWP follows a similar logic to ABP, with all sequence-
related components initialized to zero and communication channels set to empty.
• Rewrite Rules: SWP is specified by eight rewrite rules. The rules send1, rec1, send2, and
rec2 are modified to incorporate sequence numbers and window management logic. Notably,
the rewrite rules drop1, drop2, dup1, and dup2 for SWP are operationally identical to those
defined for ABP in Section 4.1. Therefore, their detailed specifications are omitted here to
avoid redundancy.
The rewrite rule send1 is defined as follows:
crl [send1] :
{( queue1: FQ) (seq: S) (index: I) (windowCount: C) OCs} =>
{( queue1: (FQ frame(S, I))) (seq: next(S))
(index: s(I)) (windowCount: s(C)) OCs}
if C < windowSize /\ I <= maxIndex /\
length(FQ) <= maxQueueLength .
20


The rewrite rule specifies that if the window count, denoted as C, is less than the predefined
windowSize, the index number, denoted as I, is less than or equal to the predefined maxIndex,
and the length of FQ is less than or equal to the predefined maxQueueLength, the message frame(S,
I) is appended to the end of queue1. This message encapsulates both the sequence number (S) and
the index number (I). The sender increments the index number and the window count by 1, and
updates the sequence number. In this formal specification, windowSize is set to 16.
The next function is defined as follows:
eq next(N) = (N + 1) rem
windowSize .
This function calculates the next number for a given number N. Specifically, it adds 1 to N and then
takes the remainder of dividing this sum by windowSize. This operation is used to cycle numbers
within a specific range defined by windowSize. This mechanism implies that the sequence numbers
follow a circular order rather than a linear one. For instance, if windowSize is 16, the numbers
cycle from 0 to 15 and back to 0, where 0 is considered the successor of 15 in this circular sequence.
The rewrite rule rec1 is defined as follows:
rl [rec1] :
{( queue2: (AC AQ)) ( expectedAckSeq : A)
(seq: S) (windowCount: C) OCs} =>
{( queue2: AQ) (expectedAckSeq: expectedAckSeq(A, seq(AC), S))
(seq: S) (windowCount: windowCount(C, A, seq(AC), S)) OCs} .
The rewrite rule specifies that if the ack message queue is not empty (indicating the existence of
awaiting ack messages within queue2), the sender processes the top ack message from this queue.
The sender updates the expectedAckSeq to reflect the sequence number of the next expected ack
message, and updates the windowCount accordingly to manage the flow of outgoing messages. The
message at the front of queue2 is removed.
To describe the expectedAckSeq function and the windowCount function, we first discuss the
between function. This is because both the expectedAckSeq function and the windowCount function
use the between function. The between function is defined as follows:
eq between(N1 , N2 , N3) =
((N1
<= N2) and (N2 < N3)) or
((N3 < N1) and (N1
<= N2)) or
((N2 < N3) and (N3 < N1)) .
A circular order governs the relationship between these numbers, where the interval from N1 to N3
may wrap around the maximum sequence value. The between function evaluates whether a given
sequence number falls within this circular arc, which is essential for deciding whether a received
frame message should be accepted or discarded. It returns true under any of the following conditions:
• N1 is less than or equal to N2, and N2 is less than N3.
• N3 is less than N1, and N1 is less than or equal to N2.
• N2 is less than N3, and N3 is less than N1.
expectedAckSeq function is defined as follows:
ceq
expectedAckSeq (N1 , N2 , N3) =
expectedAckSeq (next(N1), N2 , N3) if between(N1 , N2 , N3) .
ceq
expectedAckSeq (N1 , N2 , N3) = N1 if not
between(N1 , N2 , N3) .
21


The expectedAckSeq function calculates the expected ack sequence number given three numbers
N1, N2, and N3. It uses the between function to determine if N2 lies between N1 and N3. The process
is as follows:
• If N2 is between N1 and N3 (between(N1, N2, N3) is true), the function recursively calls itself
with the next number of N1 (next(N1)), N2, and N3 as the new arguments. This recursion
continues until N2 is no longer between N1 and N3.
• If N2 is not between N1 and N3, it simply returns N1.
The windowCount function is defined as follows:
ceq
windowCount(N1 , N2 , N3 , N4) =
windowCount(sd(N1 , 1), next(N2), N3 , N4) if between(N2 , N3 , N4) .
ceq
windowCount(N1 , N2 , N3 , N4) = N1 if not
between(N2 , N3 , N4) .
The windowCount function, which involves four numbers N1, N2, N3, and N4, updates N1 based
on specific conditions. This function is used for determining the window count within a certain
numerical range, using the between function to check if N3 lies between N2 and N4. The process is
as follows:
• If N3 is between N2 and N4 (between(N2, N3, N4) is true), the function recursively calls itself
with N1 updated to sd(N1, 1) (subtracting 1 from N1), N2 to its next number next(N2), and
keeps N3 and N4 as they are. This recursion continues until the condition becomes false.
• If N3 is not between N2 and N4, it simply returns N1.
The rewrite rule send2 is defined as follows:
crl [send2] :
{( queue2: AQ) ( expectedFrameSeq : S) (list: L) OCs} =>
{( queue2: (AQ ack(prev(S)))) ( expectedFrameSeq : S) (list: L) OCs}
if length(L) > 0 /\ length(AQ) <= maxQueueLength .
The rewrite rule specifies that if the list, denoted as L, is not empty, and the length of AQ is less
than or equal to the predefined maxQueueLength, the message ack(prev(S)) is appended to the
end of queue2. This message encapsulates the previous sequence number.
The prev function is defined as follows:
eq prev(N) = (N + sd(windowSize , 1)) rem
windowSize .
The function prev calculates the preceding number of a given number N within a cyclic range
defined by windowSize.
The sd(windowSize, 1) subtracts 1 from windowSize.
The function
adds the result of sd(windowSize, 1) to N, and then takes the remainder of dividing this sum by
windowSize. This operation ensures that the calculation cycles through the numbers within the
range of windowSize. For instance, if windowSize is 16, this function cycles numbers between 0 and
15. If N is 0, the previous number is 15.
The rewrite rule rec2 is defined as follows:
rl [rec2] :
{( queue1: (FR FQ)) ( expectedFrameSeq : S) (list: L) OCs} =>
{( queue1: FQ)
( expectedFrameSeq : (if seq(FR) = S then next(S) else S fi))
(list: (if seq(FR) = S then (index(FR) L) else L fi)) OCs} .
22


The rewrite rule specifies that if the frame message queue is not empty (indicating the existence of
awaiting frame messages within queue1), the receiver processes a frame message from this queue. If
the sequence number contained in the frame message aligns with the expected number, the receiver
then updates the expectedFrameSeq to reflect the sequence number of the next expected frame
message, and stores the index number to the list. The message at the front of queue1 is removed.
In this paper, the invariant property candidate of SWP is defined as the receiver storing the
index numbers sent by the sender in the list in order, without duplication or loss. The invariant
property candidate of SWP is defined in Maude as follows:
eq SWP -inv(SWP) = subsequence(mk(getIndex(SWP)), getList(SWP)) .
SWP-inv is defined such that the list of messages stored by the receiver is a subsequence of the list
of messages sent by the sender. The subsequence function is defined to return true if the second
list can be derived from the first by deleting zero or more elements while strictly preserving their
relative order. This definition mathematically ensures that the messages are neither duplicated,
lost, nor reordered.
5.2
Verification Results
We conjecture a simulation relation candidate from the state machine SWP to the state machine
ABP. This simulation relation requires that if ABP-inv is an invariant property wrt ABP and SWP
is simulated by ABP, then SWP-inv is an invariant property wrt SWP.
The simulation relation candidate from SWP to ABP is defined as follows:
eq r1(SWP , ABP) =
(getIndex(SWP) >= getIndex(ABP)) and
(getList(SWP) = getList(ABP)) .
This shows that the index of SWP is greater than or equal to that of ABP, and the list of SWP
is equivalent to the list of ABP. This inequality captures the fundamental behavioral difference
between the two protocols: while the sender in ABP must wait for an acknowledgment before
incrementing the index for the next message, the sender in SWP can transmit multiple messages
ahead up to the window size. Consequently, the index in SWP can advance beyond that of the
more abstract ABP, and this relation accurately abstracts such advanced states. The argument
SWP is a value of the data type SWPState representing the state of the Sliding Window Protocol.
The argument ABP is a value of the data type ABPState representing the state of the Alternating
Bit Protocol. While SWP includes various internal components for window management, r1 omits
them as they are not needed to deduce SWP-inv from ABP-inv. This focused definition is sufficient
for establishing a formal bridge between the two models.
We demonstrate that if ABP-inv is an invariant property wrt ABP and SWP is simulated by
ABP, then SWP-inv is an invariant property wrt SWP. We confirm this using the following function.
eq SWP2ABP -sim(SWP , ABP) =
r1(SWP , ABP) implies (ABP -inv(ABP) implies SWP -inv(SWP)) .
We verified this implication by employing case splitting and the red command with fresh constants,
similar to the process described in Case study I. All cases yielded the result true, thereby confirming
the deducibility of the SWP invariant.
Having established this deducibility, we then proceed to Step 3: demonstrating that SWP is sim-
ulated by ABP. By applying the three-command verification procedure established in Section 3.1—
comprising (i) srew, (ii) red, and (iii) search commands—in the same manner as in Case study I,
we formally demonstrate that the simulation relation r1 is preserved across all state transitions.
23


This result confirms that for every state transition in SWP, there exists a corresponding sequence
of transitions in ABP that preserves r1. Since we have already established in Case study I that
ABP-inv is an invariant property of ABP, we can conclude that SWP-inv is an invariant property of
SWP. This conclusion is formally supported by the composition of simulation relations r1 and r2
as per Theorem 1.
5.3
Discussion
Our experimental results provide a clear affirmative answer to RQ2. For the verification exper-
iments, we configured the parameters for SWP as maxIndex = 64, maxQueueLength = 32, and
windowSize = 16, whereas those for ABP were set to maxIndex = 64 and maxQueueLength = 32.
Under these configuration, the reachable state space of SWP is significantly larger than that of the
ABP model used in Case study I, rendering direct model checking entirely infeasible due to the state
space explosion problem. However, by decomposing the verification into two layers of simulation
(from SWP to ABP and from ABP to SCP), we successfully mitigated the state space explosion
that makes direct model checking of SWP infeasible.
In Case study I, the invariant properties ABP-inv and SCP-inv were nearly identical in their
logical structure and conceptual formulation.
In contrast, Case study II exhibited a significant
disparity between the invariant properties of the concrete and intermediate models. While SWP-inv
is defined as a subsequence requirement—ensuring that the received messages exist within the
sequence of sent messages—ABP-inv is formulated based on the specific state-matching logic of
the alternating bit. Despite this clear difference between the two properties, we successfully verified
SWP-inv by establishing a simulation relation that effectively bridges these distinct conceptual layers.
This result highlights the versatility of our proposed framework: it is not limited to cases where the
abstract and concrete properties are similar, but can also formally prove invariants even when the
gap between the properties of the abstraction layers is significant.
Our approach offers practical advantages by leveraging domain knowledge to tailor abstractions,
providing greater flexibility.
Furthermore, since many distributed protocols share fundamental
requirements such as data consistency and ordering guarantees, our technique facilitates the reuse
of previously verified formal specifications as abstract models for new targets. This reusability,
demonstrated by our hierarchical verification of SWP using the ABP and SCP models, provides a
scalable and efficient pathway for the formal verification of complex systems.
6
Related work
“Refinement” serves as a top-down development paradigm that enables the systematic derivation
of concrete implementations from abstract specifications through the stepwise augmentation of
architectural details. This paradigm traces its origins to the foundational work of Wirth [19], Hoare
[20], Dijkstra [21], and Abadi et al. [22]. Building upon these theoretical underpinnings, several
formal methods and frameworks have been established, including Vienna Development Method
(VDM) [23], Z notation [24], Abstract State Machines (ASM) [25], B-Method [26], and Event-
B [27].
Recently, there has been growing interest in using Large Language Models (LLMs) for
refinement, as exemplified by the work of Cai et al. [28] on LLM-guided code generation.
“Simulation”, in the algebraic sense defined by Milner [16], formalizes the principle of abstracting
away implementation-specific details, such as data representation and control sequencing, to identify
the core behavior shared by distinct programs. This concept is characterized by a simulation relation
acting as a quasi-ordering between programs; mutual simulation establishes an equivalence relation
24


that facilitates abstraction from implementation-specific details. Simulation is extended to concur-
rent computing through process calculi such as CSP [29] and CCS [30,31]. Within these formalisms,
bisimulation—a mutual simulation where processes mimic each other’s transitions—became a cor-
nerstone for formalizing behavioral equivalence. This ensures that disparate implementations main-
tain identical observable behaviors in concurrent environments. Subsequently, simulation is applied
to the analysis of I/O automata to verify that concrete systems satisfy the trace properties of their
abstract specifications [32,33]
Ogata and Futatsugi [12] have proposed a methodology for verifying that an observational
transition system (OTS) S maintains invariant properties through a simulation from S to another
OTS, which is more abstract than S, in the OTS/CafeOBJ method [34]. They concluded that there
is no definitive evidence to suggest the superiority of one method over the other. Subsequently, Tran
et al. [35] demonstrated the efficacy of simulation-based invariant verification through case studies
on the MCS and Anderson mutual exclusion protocols. Using CafeOBJ [36] for formal modeling
and proof, they reported that the simulation-based technique enabled a more efficient verification
process for the MCS protocol than the induction-based alternative.
The validity of refinement or simulation relations is predominantly established through theorem
proving. Whether performed manually or with the assistance of interactive provers, these deductive
approaches require significant human expertise and effort to construct rigorous proofs. In contrast,
the approach presented in this paper deviates from this convention by using model checking to verify
that a simulation holds between state machines.
There have been several papers related to the verification of the Sliding Window Protocol (SWP).
Early work by Jonsson [37] established a foundation for SWP verification using simulation, though
the proofs remained manual and did not use model checker or theorem prover. Similarly, Paliwoda
and Sanders [38] employed CSP to specify SWP incrementally by composing simpler components
like the Alternating Bit Protocol (ABP). Their approach remained a manual effort without the use
of model checker or theorem prover. Later efforts integrated model checking to improve automation.
Kaivola [39] used compositional preorders to verify SWP, effectively reducing the domain of values
for transmitted data items to a small set (e.g., {0, 1, 2}) to facilitate model checking. Nevertheless,
this approach still required manual proofs to generalize the findings to arbitrary sequence lengths.
Direct model checking of SWP has also been explored using NuSMV; for instance, Zhao et al. [40]
successfully verified the protocol but were forced to impose strict parameter constraints, such as
a window size of 4, channel lengths of 8 for the data queue from sender to receiver and 16 for
the acknowledgment queue from receiver to sender, and boolean-only messages. In contrast, Case
study II of this paper demonstrates that our proposed methodology can handle substantially larger
parameters—including a window size of 16, channel capacities of 32, and message values up to
64 —by combining the strengths of simulation and automated model checking in Maude. This
hierarchical approach eliminates the need for manual inductive proofs for generalization or strict
algebraic constraints, providing a more scalable and automated pathway for verifying complex,
practical protocols.
State space explosion is one of the most challenging problems in model checking. Numerous
researchers have addressed this problem and developed a variety of techniques to mitigate it. Clarke
et al. summarize several techniques that address the state space explosion problem in model checking
[41]. They introduce techniques such as symbolic model checking with Binary Decision Diagrams
(BDDs), partial order reduction, counterexample-guided abstraction refinement (CEGAR), and
bounded model checking.
Abstraction, in the context of model checking, aims to reduce the system’s state space by omit-
ting the irrelevant details [2–9]. This process facilitates the reduction of problems associated with
either an infinite state system or a finite but excessively large one. Although abstraction mitigates
25


this issue to a certain degree, challenges persist when addressing large systems, often hindering the
execution of some model checking experiments. Some abstraction techniques have been introduced
for use in Maude [17], such as equation abstractions [4] and predicate abstractions [42]. They target
state space explosion but involve manual overhead. While equational abstractions require the man-
ual discovery of equations and often rely on theorem proving to guarantee property preservation in
conditional equations, and predicate abstractions depend on E-unification, which requires the strict
finite variant property, and manual adjustment of state predicates to resolve spurious counterexam-
ples, our methodology offers a more accessible and streamlined verification process. Although the
construction of the abstract model and simulation relations remains a manual task, the validity of
their relationship is verified semi-automatically using standard Maude commands (specifically srew,
red, and search). This approach reduces the reliance on extensive deductive expertise by offloading
the verification of the abstraction’s correctness to an executable model-checking-based procedure.
Ákos and Zoltán have proposed a framework that extends abstraction and refinement methods
to improve the efficiency of CEGAR [43]. This framework mitigates the state space explosion prob-
lem. It is also noted that even with the framework, sufficient effectiveness may not be achieved in
certain cases. In the paper of Mann et al. [44], the authors extend CEGAR for the model check-
ing of infinite-state systems containing arrays through the incorporation of prophecy variables. By
automatically adding auxiliary variables (namely, history and prophecy variables) to the system,
their approach transforms proofs that traditionally require universally quantified invariants into
quantifier-free forms. It has been reported, however, that in some cases the CEGAR loop may
fail to terminate or suffer from scalability issues. The primary distinction between CEGAR-based
approaches and our methodology lies in the nature of the abstraction process. While CEGAR is a
reactive technique that refines models based on spurious counterexamples, our approach is proactive,
leveraging domain knowledge to construct abstract models such as SCP and ABP. This manual but
strategic abstraction provides enhanced transparency and interpretability; specifically, the simula-
tion relations maintain a human-understandable mapping between concrete and abstract behaviors,
a feature often lacking in automated refinements. Furthermore, our methodology effectively ad-
dresses the scalability limitations of CEGAR by offloading the verification of complex protocols to
a standardized sequence of symbolic Maude commands. These commands are largely independent
of the parameter scales that typically trigger state space explosion. As summarized in Table 1,
our experimental results confirm this efficiency: Steps 2 and 3 were completed within sub-second
execution times, even with large parameters that rendered direct model checking infeasible.
Fisler and Vardi explored automated bisimulation minimization as a state space reduction tech-
nique within an automata-theoretic framework [45]. However, in most cases, the computational
overhead of performing this minimization surpasses that of conventional model checking. They ar-
gued that it is unsuitable for symbolic model checking because the BDDs required to compute the
bisimulation relation become excessively large. Bustan and Grumberg [46] have conducted research
on a minimization algorithm that processes a Kripke structure M and returns the smallest struc-
ture that is simulation equivalent to M. Additionally, they developed the Partitioning Algorithm,
which constructs the quotient structure for M without the need to build the simulation preorder
explicitly. The concept of simulation equivalence is positioned as being less stringent than that of
bisimulation, but more stringent than that of simulation preorder. This relation preserves ACTL
and LTL. For the algorithms introduced in the paper [46] to be applicable to practical large-scale
systems or complex models, further studies are required to improve the time and space complexity
of the algorithms. Jansen et al. propose an algorithm that significantly improves the efficiency of
computing branching bisimilarity on Labelled Transition Systems (LTSs) [47].
Zhou et al. proposes an approach to addressing the state space explosion problem in System on a
Programmable Chip (SOPC) architectures [48]. The authors introduce techniques based on Register
26


Transfer Level (RTL) code such as variable reduction and branch relation reduction tailored to the
verification properties to compress the state space. WASIM [49] is a symbolic simulation framework
for hardware formal verification. Users can define abstraction and refinement functions through
its Python API to control the level of abstraction. It has been reported that leveraging domain
knowledge in this way can achieve efficient verification. Our methodology shares this philosophy
by using domain knowledge to construct appropriate abstract models (such as SCP and ABP) for
complex protocols.
Bae et al. [50] proposed a deductive model checking methodology that synergistically integrates
narrowing-based logical model checking with inductive theorem proving via the NuITP tool [51].
Their approach, implemented in the DM-Check tool, mitigates verification effort by employing an
inductive theorem prover as an oracle to discharge verification conditions, such as subsumption
checks. While their case studies demonstrate the verification of ABP, our methodology extends to
the more complex SWP. SWP involves more intricate control logic than ABP, including window
management and circular sequence numbers. While their method excels in handling complex log-
ical constraints and conditional rewrite theories, the proposed approach focuses on addressing the
state space explosion caused by large protocol parameters, such as window sizes in SWP, through
hierarchical simulation compositions.
While the theory of simulation has long been established in formal methods, our work provides
a practical and engineering contribution by redefining this classical theory into a highly efficient
and human-understandable “procedure” within the Maude model checking environment. By opera-
tionalizing simulation-based verification through a standardized sequence of Maude commands, we
bridge the gap between abstract theoretical relations and executable verification workflows. This
procedural approach enhances the accessibility of protocol verification, making it more intuitive
for practitioners to manage compared to purely deductive or symbolic methods that often require
intricate manual proofs or complex logical constraints.
Hubert and Frédéric provide a comprehensive review of the state of equivalence checking, which
uses relations such as bisimulation and simulation, focusing on its development over a span of 40
years [52]. They trace the evolution of algorithms, methodologies, and software tools that have
been developed to address the challenges of equivalence checking in various computing paradigms,
including concurrent, probabilistic, stochastic, mobile, and real-time systems. They emphasize that
equivalence checking has the potential to enhance the overall effectiveness of the verification process
when closely integrated with model checking and mention that it is expected to play a growing role
in the future. Given this context, combining model checking with simulation has been explored as
a promising approach. In this paper, our proposed technique is one of the first approaches that
combine model checking with simulation. Our approach provides a unified framework within Maude
for formal specification, model checking, and the verification of simulation relations.
7
Conclusion
We have proposed a new technique to mitigate the state space explosion in model checking by com-
bining it with simulation relations. Our methodology demonstrates that a concrete state machine
M can be verified by showing it is simulated by a more abstract state machine MA that satisfies a
corresponding invariant property. By operationalizing this classical theory into a standardized se-
quence of Maude commands—specifically srew, red, and search—we have bridged the gap between
abstract theoretical relations and executable verification workflows.
We also proposed a technique for the composition of simulation relations, enabling hierarchical
abstraction to handle even larger and more complex systems. The case studies on the Alternating
27


Bit Protocol and the Sliding Window Protocol demonstrate that our approach can formally verify
invariant properties where direct model checking is practically infeasible due to state space explosion.
A key advantage of this technique is the reusability of existing formal specifications as abstract
models, significantly reducing the verification effort for new systems. To ensure rigor and efficiency,
we developed a support tool that automates case splitting and command execution, minimizing
human error.
While this paper focuses on invariant properties, extending our technique to handle liveness
properties is an important direction for future research. Additionally, although the construction of
abstract models and the identification of simulation relations currently require manual effort, we
aim to develop methodologies to assist users in discovering effective simulation candidates. Further
case studies will be conducted to demonstrate the versatility of our unified framework within Maude
for a broader range of complex distributed systems.
References
[1] Edmund M. Clarke. The Birth of Model Checking, pages 1–26. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
[2] Edmund M. Clarke, Orna Grumberg, and David E. Long. Model checking and abstraction.
ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 16(5):1512–1542, sep 1994.
[3] Edmund Clarke, Orna Grumberg, Somesh Jha, Yuan Lu, and Helmut Veith. Counterexample-
guided abstraction refinement for symbolic model checking. J. ACM, 50(5):752–794, sep 2003.
[4] José Meseguer, Miguel Palomino, and Narciso Martí-Oliet. Equational abstractions. Theoretical
Computer Science, 403(2):239–264, 2008.
[5] Liangze Yin, Wei Dong, Wanwei Liu, and Ji Wang. On scheduling constraint abstraction for
multi-threaded program verification. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 46(5):549–
565, 2020.
[6] Liangze Yin, Wei Dong, Wanwei Liu, and Ji Wang. Scheduling constraint based abstraction
refinement for weak memory models.
In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE ’18, page 645–655, New York, NY, USA,
2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
[7] Kyungmin Bae, Santiago Escobar, and José Meseguer. Abstract Logical Model Checking of
Infinite-State Systems Using Narrowing. In Femke van Raamsdonk, editor, 24th International
Conference on Rewriting Techniques and Applications (RTA 2013), volume 21 of Leibniz Inter-
national Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 81–96, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2013. Schloss
Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
[8] Christel Baier and Joost-Pieter Katoen. Principles of model checking. MIT Press, 2008.
[9] Edmund M. Clarke, Thomas A. Henzinger, Helmut Veith, and Roderick Bloem, editors. Hand-
book of Model Checking. Springer, 2018.
[10] Edmund M. Clarke, Orna Grumberg, Marius Minea, and Doron A. Peled. State space reduction
using partial order techniques. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf., 2(3):279–287, 1999.
28


[11] Constantin Enea, Dimitra Giannakopoulou, Michalis Kokologiannakis, and Rupak Majumdar.
Model checking distributed protocols in must. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 8(OOPSLA2):1900–
1927, 2024.
[12] Kazuhiro Ogata and Kokichi Futatsugi. Simulation-based verification for invariant properties
in the OTS/CafeOBJ method. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 201:127–154,
2008.
[13] K. A. Bartlett, R. A. Scantlebury, and P. T. Wilkinson. A note on reliable full-duplex trans-
mission over half-duplex links. Commun. ACM, 12(5):260–261, may 1969.
[14] Andrew S. Tanenbaum and David J. Wetherall. Computer Networks. Prentice Hall Press, USA,
5th edition, 2010.
[15] Ammisetty Veeraswamy and Ammisetty Mahesh Babu. Introduction to Computer Networks:
Computer Networking A Top-Down Approach. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing, Koln, DEU,
2012.
[16] Robin Milner. An algebraic definition of simulation between programs. In D. C. Cooper, editor,
Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. London, UK,
September 1-3, 1971, pages 481–489. William Kaufmann, 1971.
[17] Manuel Clavel, Francisco Durán, Steven Eker, Patrick Lincoln, Narciso Martí-Oliet, José
Meseguer, and Carolyn L. Talcott, editors.
All About Maude - A High-Performance Logi-
cal Framework, How to Specify, Program and Verify Systems in Rewriting Logic, volume 4350
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2007.
[18] Takanori Ishibashi, Masaki Nakamura, and Kazuhiro Ogata. A support tool for verification of
simulation relations between state machines with maude. In Yuting Chen, Hiroyuki Okamura,
and Shaoying Liu, editors, Software Fault Prevention, Verification, and Validation - Second
International Symposium, SFPVV 2025, Shanghai, China, November 8-9, 2025, Proceedings,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 112–129. Springer, 2025.
[19] Niklaus Wirth.
Program development by stepwise refinement (reprint).
Commun. ACM,
26(1):70–74, 1983.
[20] C. A. R. Hoare. Proof of correctness of data representation. In Friedrich L. Bauer and Klaus
Samelson, editors, Language Hierarchies and Interfaces, International Summer School, Markto-
berdorf, Germany, July 23 - August 2, 1975, volume 46 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 183–193. Springer, 1975.
[21] Edsger W. Dijkstra. Guarded commands, nondeterminacy and formal derivation of programs.
Commun. ACM, 18(8):453–457, 1975.
[22] Martín Abadi and Leslie Lamport. The existence of refinement mappings. Theor. Comput.
Sci., 82(2):253–284, 1991.
[23] Clifford B. Jones. Systematic software development using VDM. Prentice Hall International
Series in Computer Science. Prentice Hall, 1986.
[24] J. C. P. Woodcock and Jim Davies. Using Z - specification, refinement, and proof. Prentice
Hall international series in computer science. Prentice Hall, 1996.
29


[25] Egon Börger. The ASM refinement method. Formal Aspects Comput., 15(2-3):237–257, 2003.
[26] Jean-Raymond Abrial. The B-book - assigning programs to meanings. Cambridge University
Press, 1996.
[27] Jean-Raymond Abrial. Modeling in Event-B - System and Software Engineering. Cambridge
University Press, 2010.
[28] Yufan Cai, Zhe Hou, David Sanán, Xiaokun Luan, Yun Lin, Jun Sun, and Jin Song Dong.
Automated program refinement: Guide and verify code large language model with refinement
calculus. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 9(POPL):2057–2089, 2025.
[29] C. A. R. Hoare. Communicating sequential processes. Prentice-Hall, Inc., USA, 1985.
[30] Robin Milner. A Calculus of Communicating Systems, volume 92 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Springer, 1980.
[31] Robin Milner. Communication and concurrency. PHI Series in computer science. Prentice Hall,
1989.
[32] Nancy A. Lynch and Mark R. Tuttle. Hierarchical correctness proofs for distributed algorithms.
In Fred B. Schneider, editor, Proceedings of the Sixth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles
of Distributed Computing, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, August 10-12, 1987, pages
137–151. ACM, 1987.
[33] Nancy A. Lynch. Distributed Algorithms. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco,
CA, USA, 1996.
[34] Kazuhiro Ogata and Kokichi Futatsugi. Proof scores in the ots/cafeobj method. In Formal
Methods for Open Object-Based Distributed Systems: 6th IFIP WG 6.1 International Confer-
ence, FMOODS 2003, Paris, France, November 19.21, 2003. Proceedings 6, pages 170–184.
Springer, 2003.
[35] Duong Dinh Tran, Dang Duy Bui, and Kazuhiro Ogata. Simulation-Based Invariant Verification
Technique for the OTS/CafeOBJ Method. IEEE Access, 9:93847–93870, 2021.
[36] Razvan Diaconescu and Kokichi Futatsugi. CafeOBJ report: The language, proof techniques,
and methodologies for object-oriented algebraic specification, volume 6. World Scientific, 1998.
[37] Bengt Jonsson. Modular verification of asynchronous networks. In Fred B. Schneider, editor,
Proceedings of the Sixth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, August 10-12, 1987, pages 152–166. ACM, 1987.
[38] Karen Paliwoda and Jeff W. Sanders.
An incremental specification of the sliding-window
protocol. Distributed Comput., 5:83–94, 1991.
[39] Roope Kaivola. Using compositional preorders in the verification of sliding window protocal.
In Orna Grumberg, editor, Computer Aided Verification, 9th International Conference, CAV
’97, Haifa, Israel, June 22-25, 1997, Proceedings, volume 1254 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 48–59. Springer, 1997.
[40] Yefei Zhao, Zongyuan Yang, Jinkui Xie, and Qiang Liu. Formal model and analysis of sliding
window protocol based on nusmv. J. Comput., 4(6):519–526, 2009.
30


[41] Edmund M. Clarke, William Klieber, Miloš Nováček, and Paolo Zuliani. Model Checking and
the State Explosion Problem, pages 1–30. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012.
[42] Kyungmin Bae and José Meseguer. Predicate abstraction of rewrite theories. In Gilles Dowek,
editor, Rewriting and Typed Lambda Calculi, pages 61–76, Cham, 2014. Springer International
Publishing.
[43] Ákos Hajdu and Zoltán Micskei. Efficient strategies for cegar-based model checking. J. Autom.
Reason., 64(6):1051–1091, 2020.
[44] Makai Mann,
Ahmed Irfan,
Alberto Griggio,
Oded Padon,
and Clark W. Barrett.
Counterexample-guided prophecy for model checking modulo the theory of arrays. In Jan Friso
Groote and Kim Guldstrand Larsen, editors, Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and
Analysis of Systems - 27th International Conference, TACAS 2021, Held as Part of the Euro-
pean Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2021, Luxembourg City,
Luxembourg, March 27 - April 1, 2021, Proceedings, Part I, volume 12651 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 113–132. Springer, 2021.
[45] Kathi Fisler and Moshe Y. Vardi. Bisimulation minimization in an automata-theoretic verifi-
cation framework. In Ganesh Gopalakrishnan and Phillip Windley, editors, Formal Methods in
Computer-Aided Design, pages 115–132, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[46] Doron Bustan and Orna Grumberg. Simulation-based minimization. ACM Trans. Comput.
Logic, 4(2):181–206, apr 2003.
[47] David N. Jansen, Jan Friso Groote, Jeroen J. A. Keiren, and Anton Wijs. An o(m log n)
algorithm for branching bisimilarity on labelled transition systems. In Tools and Algorithms
for the Construction and Analysis of Systems: 26th International Conference, TACAS 2020,
Held as Part of the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS
2020, Dublin, Ireland, April 25–30, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, pages 3–20, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2020. Springer-Verlag.
[48] Shan Zhou, Jinbo Wang, Panpan Xue, Xiangyang Wang, and Lu Kong. An approach to the
state explosion problem: Sopc case study. Electronics, 12(24), 2023.
[49] Wenji Fang and Hongce Zhang. WASIM: A word-level abstract symbolic simulation framework
for hardware formal verification. In Sriram Sankaranarayanan and Natasha Sharygina, editors,
Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems - 29th International Con-
ference, TACAS 2023, Held as Part of the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice
of Software, ETAPS 2022, Paris, France, April 22-27, 2023, Proceedings, Part II, volume 13994
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 11–18. Springer, 2023.
[50] Kyungmin Bae, Santiago Escobar, Raúl López-Rueda, José Meseguer, and Julia Sapiña. Ver-
ifying invariants by deductive model checking. In Kazuhiro Ogata and Narciso Martí-Oliet,
editors, Rewriting Logic and Its Applications - 15th International Workshop, WRLA 2024,
Luxembourg City, Luxembourg, April 6-7, 2024, Revised Selected Papers, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 3–21. Springer, 2024.
[51] Francisco J. Durán, Santiago Escobar, José Meseguer, and Julia Sapiña. Nuitp: An inductive
theorem prover for equational program verification. In Alessandro Bruni, Alberto Momigliano,
31


Matteo Pradella, Matteo Rossi, and James Cheney, editors, Proceedings of the 26th Interna-
tional Symposium on Principles and Practice of Declarative Programming, PPDP 2024, Milano,
Italy, September 9-11, 2024, pages 6:1–6:11. ACM, 2024.
[52] Hubert Garavel and Frédéric Lang. Equivalence checking 40 years after: A review of bisimula-
tion tools. In Nils Jansen, Mariëlle Stoelinga, and Petra van den Bos, editors, A Journey from
Process Algebra via Timed Automata to Model Learning - Essays Dedicated to Frits Vaandrager
on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday, volume 13560 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 213–265. Springer, 2022.
32
