Theorem-Proving Agent over Abstract Syntax Tree
of Redesigned Language
Qiyuan Xu
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
qiyuan.xu@ntu.edu.sg
Joshua Ong Jun Leang
Imperial College London
London, UK
j.ong25@imperial.ac.uk
Renxi Wang
MBZUAI
Abu Dhabi, UAE
renxi.wang@mbzuai.ac.ae
Wenda Li
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
wenda.li@ed.ac.uk
Haonan Li
MBZUAI
Abu Dhabi, UAE
haonan.li@mbzuai.ac.ae
Luke Ong
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
luke.ong@ntu.edu.sg
Conrad Watt
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
conrad.watt@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract—Interactive theorem proving (ITP) underpins pro-
gram verification and formalized mathematics, but its manual
effort limits scalability. LLM-based proof agents promise to ease
this effort, but their heavy token consumption and API cost re-
main a major obstacle. We trace this cost to a shared root: current
agents operate on serialized concrete syntax, emitting proofs as
source text and recovering proof states through separate, line-
number-based queries, so every edit shifts later lines and forces
repeated relocation of errors and states. This same dependence
on concrete syntax also blocks adoption of Minilang, a recent
proof language that reaches SOTA on LLM-based proving but is
too new for LLMs’ training corpora. We address both problems
by lifting the agent off source text and onto the abstract syntax
tree (AST): the model supplies proofs as JSON representations
of Minilang’s AST—native to tool-calling LLMs—and drives the
prover through a tree-edit model that fuses proof operations
and states into one proof tree, so each operation carries its
own subgoal’s state, readable directly off the tree. We realize
this design in Agent over AST (AoA). Against Amazon’s Isabelle
Agent on miniF2F and NTP4VC-Pearl common success sets, AoA
cuts API cost by 2.3–4.7× (normalized input-cache accounting),
uses 2.9–6.9× fewer tokens and 3.9–8.9× fewer tool calls, and
finishes 1.4–2.0× faster—while also solving far more problems
on the harder verification benchmark.
I. INTRODUCTION
Theorem proving is fundamental to program verification and
formalized mathematics. Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP),
with its greater expressiveness compared to search-based Au-
tomated Theorem Provers (ATPs), serves as the foundation for
advanced program verifiers featuring rich program logics [1]–
[4] and for the formalization of sophisticated mathematical
theories [5], [6]. However, despite this expressiveness, pro-
gram verifiers and formalized mathematical projects built on
top of ITPs are widely criticized for their tremendous labor
cost, which limits their scalability significantly.
Promisingly, emerging Large Language Model (LLM)
agents [5]–[10] provide powerful automation for ITPs, and
thereby offer an opportunity to address this limitation, trans-
forming the advanced verification and formalization tech-
niques confined to academia into software engineering meth-
ods that can be adopted pervasively. For example, on the
benchmark VeriSoftBench [11] consisting of proof goals from
projects about compiler correctness, programming language
semantics, and verification frameworks, the leading agent
Aleph prover [12] generates Lean proofs achieving 94%
pass rate [12]. On PutnamBench [13], a formalization of the
graduate-level Putnam mathematics competition [14], Aleph
prover achieves a pass rate of 99.4% [15].
However, these advances also expose a general weakness
among existing proof agents: the cost of API calls to LLMs is
prohibitively high. The Aleph prover incurs an average cost of
$68 per problem on PutnamBench; AxProverBase [16], which
achieves only a 54% pass rate on PutnamBench, averages
$12.6 per problem across multiple benchmarks; the Numina
Lean Agent [8] budgets roughly $50 per problem on the
Putnam 2025 competition, rising to $1,000 for its hardest
problems; and Archon [17] spends $975 on average to prove a
single research-level math problem. It should also be noted that
concrete program verification tasks may be substantially more
expensive than the figures reported on the mathematical bench-
marks above, for two reasons: First, verifying a program, even
just its critical components, involves a large number of proof
goals. The verification of ∼10k lines of C code in the seL4 OS
kernel involves ∼70k proof goals. Second, a typical program
verification process frequently revises the formalization, either
to correct flaws in it or in response to other factors such as
code updates. As a result, the seL4 repository records ∼140k
distinct proof goals across its commit history. Pricing each
proof goal at AxProverBase’s reported $12.6 average cost per
problem across benchmarks, seL4’s ∼70k–140k proof goals
imply roughly $0.9M–$1.8M in API cost alone. Note that
seL4 is an academic project; for industrial-scale applications,
the cost could be far greater. To cut costs, one could certainly
switch to cheaper models. However, given the tension between
cost and the reasoning capability of language models, one
would naturally prefer to use powerful models at a lower cost.
This raises our research question:
arXiv:2607.16372v1  [cs.SE]  17 Jul 2026


RQ1. How can we reduce the API cost of proof agents,
from the side of agent design?
In parallel, a recent work introduced Minilang, a redesigned
proof language aimed at improving LLM efficiency on the-
orem proving. Minilang [18] emphasizes that LLMs should
focus on high-level proof design while delegating the fine-
grained logical reasoning they are poor at to classical ATPs
with well-defined search-based algorithms. In addition, Mini-
lang redesigns its language constructs to provide LLMs with
more automated and higher-level interfaces that mitigate the
gap between formal proofs and the natural-language corpora
that general-purpose LLMs are trained on. We believe that
these designs can reduce the reasoning burden on LLMs
and improve the accuracy of their proof generation, thereby
effectively lowering the API cost of proof agents.
However, one difficulty is that Minilang is a new language
whose large proof corpus was released only on Dec. 22, 2025.
Agents cannot rely on general-purpose LLMs having corpus-
scale familiarity with Minilang proofs or its concrete syntax.
Moreover, fine-tuning on such a corpus may be theoretically
feasible, but it is expensive in practice and faces obstacles such
as data scarcity for newly designed languages and catastrophic
forgetting. This leads to our second research question:
RQ2. Can we enable general-purpose LLMs to construct
formal proofs in a language for which they lack corpus-
scale proof exposure, purely through system design and
without modifying the underlying models?
Our answer rests on a common practice in programming
language studies: concrete syntax is largely incidental, so one
abstracts away from it and defines a language’s syntax as an
Abstract Syntax Tree (AST). In this paper, we present and
study a proof agent built on Minilang’s AST. In detail, we
define Minilang’s AST as a recursive algebraic datatype and
formalize it using JSON Schema, a format that LLMs are
natively and extensively trained on to support tool calling.
With this JSON Schema, LLMs can then express Minilang’s
ASTs as JSON representations. This removes the LLMs’
dependence on any particular concrete syntax of Minilang,
allowing them to focus on how a proof should be constructed
semantically, rather than on how it must be spelled out in
that syntax. Moreover, general-purpose LLMs are capable of
this semantic construction because Minilang is deliberately
designed so that each of its language constructs mirrors a step
in natural-language, pen-and-paper reasoning. Essentially, we
abstract away from the concrete syntax, extract the semantic
information it conveys, and re-express it in LLMs’ native
languages. In this way, we provide a concrete solution to RQ2
for the case of Minilang.
The above addresses how to get LLMs to produce Minilang.
A proof agent, however, does more than have the LLM emit
proof scripts; it also requires intricate interaction with the ITP
system, such as retrieving proof states and error messages.
In conventional proof agents [7]–[9], [17], [19], [20], LLMs
generate proofs by writing source-code snippets into a plain-
text file through a tool call. After completing a proof edit, the
agents typically require the LLMs to issue another tool call to
run the proof checker. If the proof fails to check, the agents’
responses to the LLMs locate each error in the proof by a file
path and a line number. The LLMs must then navigate to the
reported location and read the surrounding source code with
a read tool. They may also need additional Language Server
Protocol (LSP) tool calls, for example, to inspect the proof
state or the type of a variable at a given location, in order to
understand why the proof fails and determine how to repair it.
Consequently, the process incurs a large number of tool calls.
This is a major contributor to the high API cost, because each
tool call constitutes a separate API request that must carry the
entire conversation history as input.
We observe that this inefficiency shares the same root cause
as Minilang’s generation problem above: the agent is forced
to operate on serialized concrete syntax. Because the proof
lives as plain text, the proof state, errors, and types the LLM
needs are not directly available, and must be recovered through
separate, line-number-based tool calls. We therefore apply the
same remedy to the interaction as a whole. Just as in our
earlier “abstract away and re-express” approach, we extract
the abstract semantic model underlying the interactive proving
process and formulate it as a novel tree-edit proof model,
which we believe better recovers a proof’s natural deductive
structure, in the spirit of Natural Deduction, long regarded as
close to the way humans naturally construct proofs. In this
model, the evolving proof state and the proof operations are
fused into a proof tree, so that every proof operation carries
the state of its own subgoal. The agent advances the proof
by editing the tree directly rather than by patching source
code text. This gives a single, self-contained representation
that removes the indirection of conventional agents: everything
the LLM needs is read directly off the tree, rather than chased
through brittle line numbers that shift with every edit.
Based on this design, we present AoA, a proof agent built on
Minilang. AoA substantially reduces the cost of proof agents.
On the common success sets, and under normalized input-
cache-rate accounting, AoA achieves 2.3–4.7× lower API cost
than Amazon’s Isabelle Agent. It also reduces total token
consumption by 2.9–6.9×. This saving is accompanied by a
3.9–8.9× reduction in the number of tool calls, and AoA is
not slower: in our runs, it finishes the cases 1.4–2.0× faster.
These results support our answer to RQ1: redesigning the
proof language and exposing its AST within a tree-edit proof
model provides an effective way to reduce proof-agent cost.
Beyond these efficiency gains, AoA also achieves strong
absolute proving performance: it reaches an 89.2% pass rate
on the NTP4VC-Pearl benchmark, setting a new state of the
art for verification-condition proving, and achieves 99.6% on
miniF2F, matching the state-of-the-art result reported by Seed-
Prover [5]. We summarize the contributions of this paper.
• We propose a tree-edit proof model over Minilang AST,
replacing source-file patching with proof-tree editing
and eliminating the need for separate line-number-based
proof-state queries.


• We present AoA, a proof agent built on this tree-
edit model, enabling general-purpose LLMs to construct
proofs in a proof language without corpus-scale exposure
to its proof corpus, and without fine-tuning the LLM.
• We evaluate and analyze AoA on miniF2F and NTP4VC-
Pearl against Amazon’s Isabelle Agent.
II. BACKGROUND
This section first provides the necessary background on
Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP — § II-A). It then reviews
the mainstream design of current-generation proof agents
(§ II-B), which serves as a baseline against which we present
our novelty. Finally, it introduces Minilang (§ II-C), the proof
language on top of which our agent AoA is built.
A. Interactive Theorem Proving
ITP develops a proof as a dialogue between the user and the
prover. The user supplies the proof one step at a time, and the
prover responds with the resulting proof state: the goals that
remain to be proved, together with the hypotheses available
for proving them. Reading this state, the user decides on the
next step, and the proof grows through this back-and-forth.
A subtlety is that the proof state at a given point is generally
not evident from the proof script itself; it has to be computed
by the prover. To inspect it, users typically move the cursor
to the position of interest, and the prover reports the proof
state holding at that point. This cursor-driven, position-based
access to the proof state is the interaction model that current
proof agents inherit.
B. The Conventional Paradigm of Proof Agents
A proof agent equips a language model with tools for edit-
ing and checking proofs. Current-generation theorem-proving
agents largely follow the coding-agent paradigm: the model
edits proof source code until it is accepted by the checker.
This source-centered design has two limiting features: (1) the
language model directly produces the proof in the concrete
syntax of the target proof language; and (2) most interactions
with the prover are built on source code positions (file path,
line, and column).
Two representative examples are the Numina Lean Agent [8]
and Amazon’s Isabelle Agent [20]. The former drives Claude
Code to edit Lean source files directly; the latter lets the
language model patch Isabelle proof text into the source file.
To let the language model interact with the prover, both expose
a series of tools, many of which are based on source-code
positions. For example, to access the proof state at a given
position, the Numina Lean Agent prompts the language model
to specify exact file paths, line numbers, and column numbers
(note that language models are known to be poor at counting
the letters in a word and therefore column numbers [21], [22]);
Amazon’s agent retrieves proof states through a cursor-based
procedure, requiring separate tool calls to move the cursor
and inspect the state. As tool-call responses sent back to the
language model, the proof checker’s error messages are passed
essentially verbatim; the model must then use the line numbers
they contain to locate each error in the source file, read the
surrounding code, and often issue a further tool call to inspect
the proof state and context.
We see two limitations with this paradigm, one with each
of the two features above. First, generation tied to a specific
concrete syntax may be acceptable for languages that general-
purpose LLMs have already mastered, but it is unfavorable
for newly designed formal languages that continually arise
in the development and study of formal languages: for such
a language, either there is too little corpus to fine-tune
models, or the cost is prohibitive. This clearly hinders the
progress of formal languages, and in particular our adoption
of Minilang [18]. Second, interaction built on source-code
positions is inefficient. To line up the prover’s responses with
the corresponding parts of the proof script, the agent must
constantly navigate back and forth within the source files; and
because editing a source file shifts the line numbers below
the edit, the positions it has already located are repeatedly
invalidated, further aggravating this navigation.
C. Minilang, A Proof Language Specially Designed for LLM
Isabelle/Minilang [18] is a high-level proof-planning lan-
guage tailored to large language models. Its design is mo-
tivated by two observations about LLMs: first, LLMs are
weaker at fine-grained logical reasoning than at planning a
proof as a whole, and even when they can carry out such
reasoning, they do so far less efficiently than procedures
built on well-defined, search-based algorithms such as reso-
lution [23], superposition [24], and DPLL(T) [25]. Second,
LLMs reason far more readily in natural language than in
formal languages [26], [27], a disparity commonly attributed
to the predominance of natural language over formal text in
their training corpora. For the first, Minilang offers a family
of structural commands for laying out high-level proof plans,
and delegates the proof obligation each step incurs to classical
Automated Theorem Provers (ATPs), such as Satisfiability
Modulo Theories (SMT) solvers (e.g., Z3 [28] and cvc5 [29])
and first-order provers (e.g., E [30] and Metis [31]). For the
second, Minilang provides a second kind of command that
mirrors the operations commonly found in natural-language,
pen-and-paper proofs, such as unfolding and simplification.
The discussion in this paper need not cover every Mini-
lang command; we therefore leave the details to the original
work [18] and, following the two kinds above, formalize:
Minilang Proof ::= Minilang Cmd+
Minilang Cmd ::= Op(args) Proof Blocks END
| Op(args)
Proof Blocks ::= Minilang Cmd∗
| Minilang Cmd∗NEXT Proof Blocks
A Minilang proof script is a non-empty sequence of Mini-
lang commands (denoted as Minilang Cmd+). A structural
command (e.g., line 3 and 8 in Fig. 2a) is commenced by its
operator Op together with its arguments args, and terminated
by the keyword END that marks the end of the proof blocks


TABLE I: Core tools of AoA agent
Name
Description
READ
Returns the proof tree in YAML format. Optionally takes
a node identifier and returns the subtree rooted at it.
EDIT
Fills an empty slot with Minilang ASTs, inserts ASTs
before a node, amends an existing node, or deletes one.
QUERY
Uses natural-language descriptions to semantically search
for relevant lemmas, inference rules, constants, and types,
optionally filtered by structure patterns.
SUBAGENT
Launches a subagent to prove a specified goal under the
context scoped to that goal’s subtree.
LLM
Tools
Initial
Inspect the proof state using READ;
Prompt
write the proof using EDIT
Failure
No open goals
No errors
Proof complete
call
response
resource
exhausted
claim finished
No? Prompt to repair.
Yes?
Fig. 1: The agent pipeline of AoA
it opens. A proof block can contain zero or more commands
(Minilang Cmd∗).
III. METHOD: OVER THE ABSTRACT SYNTAX TREE
As motivated in § I, AoA interacts with the prover through
a tree-edit proof model over Minilang’s AST. This section
develops this design. § III-A first presents a running example
to illustrate how AoA constructs a proof by editing the proof
tree. § III-B then formalizes the underlying tree-edit model, in
which proof operations and prover states are interleaved in a
single tree. Finally, § III-C describes the proof agent built on
top of this model.
A. A Running Example of AoA
In this example, we consider a simple functional-correctness
property of Binary-Search-Tree (BST) insertion: inserting an
element into a BST does not lose or create any other element;
it only adds the inserted element to the set of elements
already stored in the tree. Fig. 2a shows how this property
is formalized in Isabelle/HOL and proved in Minilang. Here,
insert(x, t) denotes the BST obtained by inserting x into t,
and elems(t) denotes the set of elements stored in t.
Architecturally, AoA consists of a fixed agent pipeline and
a collection of LLM tools; the main ones are summarized in
Table I. Among these tools, READ and EDIT form the core
interface to the tree-edit model, and they are the two tools used
throughout this example. The pipeline is simple: once a target
proof goal is given and the agent is launched, it first prompts
the LLM to inspect the current proof goal using READ.
The READ tool serializes the current proof tree into a
YAML representation and returns it to the LLM. On this first
invocation, the proof tree is the initial one illustrated in Fig. 2c,
which contains the contextual variables and the goal statement.
After the LLM inspects the initial tree, the pipeline prompts
it to construct the proof by calling EDIT. The EDIT tool takes
three arguments: the identifier of the node to be edited, the
edit mode, and a JSON representation of a Minilang AST. The
edit modes will be elaborated in § III-B; for now, it suffices to
note that the initial proof tree (Fig. 2c) indicates that the LLM
should call EDIT to fill node 1. Suppose the LLM constructs
the Minilang proof shown in Fig. 2a. The first step of this
construction is the Induction command at line 3, so the LLM
calls EDIT(1, fill, Fig. 2d), where Fig. 2d denotes the JSON
representation of this command’s AST.
After applying this EDIT call, the proof tree becomes the
one shown in Fig. 2b. Importantly, the tree records not only the
proof operation just inserted, but also the effect of executing
that operation on the proof state. In this example, the induction
on t decomposes the original goal into two subgoals: the base
case where t is a leaf, and the inductive case where t is a
node. The statements of these subgoals, together with their
contextual variables and premises, are displayed directly in
the proof tree. The LLM therefore need not infer or guess
how the proof operation changes the proof state; it can read
the result computed by the ITP system.
The LLM could obtain this updated tree (Fig. 2b) by calling
READ again. More conveniently and efficiently, however, EDIT
directly returns to the LLM a compressed overview of the
updated proof tree, as shown in Fig. 2e. This response incre-
mentally synchronizes the proof-state changes across the proof
tree with the LLM. Proof states that remain unchanged are
omitted, while successfully completed subtrees are collapsed;
the full compression policy is described in § III-C. In this
way, the LLM is informed of all relevant changes caused by
the edit without having to read the entire updated tree again.
With this updated information, the LLM continues the proof
by freely invoking the tools in Table I as needed. For example,
it may follow the msg fields in the compressed response shown
in Fig. 2e and use EDIT to fill the empty proof slot 1.2.1 with
the Minilang AST shown in Fig. 2f, and the slot 1.1.1 with
{"operation": "Obvious"} which delegates the proof
goal to ATPs. AoA’s pipeline itself does not prescribe a fixed
sequence of tool calls. It intervenes only when the LLM reports
that the proof is complete: it then checks whether all subgoals
have been proved and whether any evaluation errors remain. If
some unfinished subgoal or failed node remains, the pipeline
prompts the LLM to work on the corresponding node, and
this process repeats until the proof is successfully completed
or the resource limits are reached. The full AoA pipeline is
illustrated in Fig. 1.
B. A Tree-Edit Model That Interleaves States and Operations
The running example above illustrates the interaction model
of AoA in concrete terms. We now formalize the underlying
tree-edit proof model. The model has three components: a


1 theorem BST_insertion_preserves_elements:
2
elems(insert(x, t)) = {x} ∪elems(t)
3 INDUCTION t
4
the base case when t is a leaf is trivial
5 NEXT
6
the inductive case when t is a node ⟨l, v, r⟩with
7
left subtree l, value v, and right subtree r
8
BRANCH x < v | x = v | x > v
9
To show the case of x < v, we only need a lemma:
10
HAVE insert(x, ⟨l, v, r⟩) = ⟨insert(x, l), a, r⟩END
11
NEXT the case of x = v ...
12
NEXT the case of x > v ...
13 END
(a) An example of Minilang
variables: unchanged
goal: unchanged
proof:
step id: 1
operation: Induction
target: t
induction cases:
- goal id: 1.1
goal: elems(insert(x, Leaf)) = {x} ∪elems(Leaf)
proof: Empty! Call the edit tool to fill step 1.1.1
- goal id: 1.2
variables:
v: int
l, r: int bst
premises:
hyp1: elem(insert(x, l)) = {x} ∪elem(l)
hyp2: elem(insert(x, r)) = {x} ∪elem(r)
conclusion:
elems(insert(x, ⟨l, v, r⟩)) = {x} ∪elems(⟨l, v, r⟩)
proof: Empty! Call the edit tool to fill step 1.2.1
(b) The proof tree after applying line 3
variables:
x: int
t: int bst
goal: elems(insert(x, t)) = {x} ∪elems(t)
proof: Empty! Call the edit tool to fill step 1
(c) Initial proof tree
{ "operation": "Induction",
"target": "t",
"proofs": "Given_Later"
}
(d) Minilang AST at line 3, in JSON
- step id: 1
- goal id: 1.1
statement: elems(insert(x, Leaf)) = {x} ∪elems(Leaf)
msg: Unfinished proof! Fill step 1.1.1
- goal id: 1.2
variables: variables v, l, r and their types
premises: hypothese hyp1 and hyp2
conclusion: elems(insert(x, ⟨l, v, r⟩)) = {x} ∪elems(⟨l, v, r⟩)
msg: Unfinished proof! Fill step 1.2.1
(e) The return of the Edit tool for filling line 3
{ "operation": "Branch",
"cases": [
{ "statement": "x < v"
"proofs": [{
"operation": "Have",
"statement": "insert(· · · ) = · · · "
"proof":[{"operation": "Obvious"}]
}]
}, other cases... ]
}
(f) Minilang AST for line 8-14, in JSON
Fig. 2: Examples of Minilang, the JSON representation of its AST, and the YAML representation of the proof tree.
proof tree, whose nodes represent proof operations, goals, and
empty proof slots (§ III-B1); a set of edit commands that
modify this tree (§ III-B2); and an evaluation mechanism that
re-computes the affected proof states after each edit (§ III-B3).
1) The Tree Model: In our model, the editable object is
a proof tree, rather than a serialized proof script. A proof
tree is rooted at a goal node. Each goal node contains a
proof component, consisting of a sequence of proof-operation
nodes and, if the proof is unfinished, a trailing empty slot
(denoted Opr∗Slot?). Conversely, each proof-operation node
contains zero or more goal nodes (denoted Goal∗) generated
by applying that operation. This gives a tree in which proof
goals and proof operations are interleaved layer by layer.
Proof Tree ::= Goal
Node ::= Opr | Goal | Slot
Opr ::= (id, op, args, msg, goals),
goals ∈Goal∗
Goal ::= (id, statement, proof ),
proof ∈Opr∗Slot?
Slot ::= (id)
len(proof ) > 0
id ∈Id ::= ind | id.ind
ind ∈Index
Since applying a proof operation transitions the proof state,
an operation node records the resulting state in its msg field,
together with any notice or warning reported during execution.
This attaches prover feedback directly to the operation node.
The design of the node identifier aims to be informative to
the LLM rather than being a meaningless, opaque token. We
therefore design a node identifier id as a dot-separated list of
indexes, forming a path descending from the root to the target
node, each index identifying a child one level down, thereby
encoding its structural position within the tree. For example,
identifier 2.1.4 locates the 4th operation of the 1st subgoal
of the 2nd operation of the top goal.
2) Tree Editing: The concrete implementation of the EDIT
tool takes three arguments: the identifier of the target node, an
edit mode (fill/insert/amend/delete), and a JSON representation
of Minilang ASTs. For ease of presentation, we use the
following abstract syntax for EDIT calls:
Edit Tool ::= Fill (id, segs)
segs ∈Minilang Seg+
| Insert Before (id, segs)
| Amend (id, segs)
| Delete (id)
Minilang Seg ::= Minilang Cmd extended with Hole


Goal
· · ·
Slot(i)
Goal
· · ·
⟨segs⟩i
Fill (i, segs)
if Goal
is proven
Goal
· · ·
Slot(i)
Goal
· · ·
⟨segs⟩i
Slot(i + len(segs))
Fill (i, segs)
if Goal
is not proven
Goal
· · ·
Opr(i, · · · )
· · ·
Goal
· · ·
⟨segs⟩i−
⟨Opr(i, · · · )⟩
⟨· · · ⟩
Insert (i, segs)
Goal
· · ·
Opr(i, · · · )
· · ·
Goal
· · ·
⟨· · · ⟩
Delete(i, segs)
Goal0
· · ·
Opr(i, · · · )
Goal1
Oprs1
· · ·
· · ·
Goaln
Oprsn
· · ·
Goal0
· · ·
⟨seg⟩i
Goal′
1
⟨Oprs1⟩
· · ·
⟨· · · ⟩
Goal′
n
⟨Oprsn⟩
· · ·
Amend (i, seg)
if ⟨seg⟩i is an operation
and ⟨seg⟩i opens n goals
Goal
· · ·
Opr(i, · · · ) · · ·
Goal
· · ·
⟨segs⟩i−
⟨· · · ⟩
Amend (i, segs)
otherwise
Fig. 3: The behaviors of the tree edit commands. Here, we use i to denote an identifier instead of id. Notation ⟨segs⟩i denotes
the elaboration of Minilang segments segs into nodes. Notation i−denotes an index interpolated between i −1 and i.
A Hole is a nullary Minilang operator that marks the point
where the current edit stops, leaving the rest of the proof to a
subsequent edit; when the edit is applied, each Hole is realized
as a Slot in the proof-script tree.
The behaviors of the four edit commands is illustrated in
Fig. 3. Fill (id, segs) replaces the Slot identified by id with the
given sequence of operations; should these not yet close the
goal that owned the slot, a fresh Slot is left after them so that
the proof can be continued. Insert Before (id, segs) splices
the given operations into the proof immediately before node id,
leaving that node and its siblings in place. Amend (id, segs)
usually deletes the subtree at id and replaces it with the new
operations; specially, if segs is a single operation that, applied
to the same goal, opens exactly as many subgoals as the
existing node id did, then only node id itself is replaced in
place, and each subgoal retains the proof it already carried. The
latter special semantics of Amend is helpful when one wishes
to amend merely a node’s operator or arguments, sparing the
need to delete its entire subtree and rebuild it from scratch.
Finally, the last command is Delete (id), which removes node
id and its entire subtree.
3) Proof Evaluation: In Fig. 3, notation ⟨node⟩denotes re-
evaluating the node together with its subtree, refreshing the
proof state and messages recorded in the msg field of each.
This means that the edited node and all the siblings following
it are re-evaluated after every edit, propagating the edit’s effect
on the proof state through the rest of the proof in real time.
Owing to Minilang’s language design, the effect of each proof
operation on the proof state is confined to the proof block in
which it resides; it therefore suffices to re-evaluate only the
siblings following it, leaving all external nodes untouched.
The exact formalization of this re-evaluation mechanism and
the definition of ⟨node⟩lie outside the main novelty of this
paper; we therefore defer them to the released source code in
our supplementary material. We should note, nonetheless, that
the mechanism is non-trivial in handling evaluation failures.
In our implementation, each node additionally carries an
evaluation status, either successful, failed, or pending. When
a node’s operation fails to evaluate, all the siblings following
it are marked pending, and their proof states, along with the
prover’s feedback recorded in msg, become unavailable.
As another related notation in Fig. 3, the newly added
nodes are denoted ⟨segs⟩i, with i the identifier at which
they are placed. Function ⟨·⟩i :: Minilang Seg+ →Node+
elaborates the segments segs into proof-script tree nodes and
evaluates the nodes. Since we do not formalize the evaluation
mechanism in this paper, we provide only a partial definition of
⟨segs⟩i, which ignores the case of evaluation failure. Assuming
the operation Op(args) evaluates successfully on the proof
state at i and opens n subgoals with statements {sk}n
k=1,
⟨
Op(args)
segs1
NEXT · · ·
NEXT segsn
END ⟩
i
≜
Opr(i, Op, args, msg)
Goal(i.1, s1)
⟨segs1⟩i.1.1
· · ·
· · ·
Goal(i.n, sn)
⟨segsn⟩i.n.1
⟨Op(args)⟩i ≜Opr(i, Op, args, msg)
⟨Hole⟩i ≜Slot(i)
⟨seg1, · · · , segn⟩i ≜⟨seg1⟩i, · · · , ⟨segn⟩i+(n−1)
Following Minilang’s structural hierarchy, the function ⟨·⟩i
elaborates each Minilang operator into an Opr node, evaluates
that operation, records the prover’s feedback in its msg field,
spawns the resulting subgoals as Goal nodes, and recurses
on the proof of each subgoal. This recursion continues until
it reaches an atomic operation with no subgoals, or a Hole,
which is elaborated into a Slot.


C. The Proof Agent Built on top of the Tree-Edit Model
Given the tree-edit proof model formalized in the previous
subsection, building a proof agent on top of it is largely
straightforward, amounting to little more than implementing
its edit commands as LLM tools.
The Read tool takes an id as its argument, serializes the
subtree rooted at node id as text, and returns the text to the
LLM. One design choice here is how that subtree is serialized.
We simply choose YAML because 1) it is naturally suited to
representing trees, 2) it is readable, and 3) it is well represented
in LLMs’ training corpora.
Another design question concerns the Edit tool’s response,
which must convey the resulting changes in proof state back
to the LLM economically. Naively returning the entire proof
tree carries a great deal of redundant information, especially
since each edit affects only a subtree. We therefore return a
compressed representation of the tree (Fig. 2e). For each exe-
cuted operation, it shows only the prover’s feedback recorded
in the msg field, omitting the operation’s args, which the LLM
itself supplied and which already appear in the tool-calling
records in its context. The resulting proof goal is printed only
for operations that actually change it, so an operation such
as Have contributes none. Finally, any completed subtree free
of evaluation failures is collapsed, since a successfully proven
branch rarely needs further attention.
IV. EVALUATION
Having presented the AoA agent and the tree-edit proof
model it is built on, we now evaluate whether the design
delivers on the two research questions raised in § I:
RQ1. How can we reduce the API cost of proof agents, from
the side of agent design?
RQ2. Can we enable general-purpose LLMs to construct for-
mal proofs in a language they have rarely or never
encountered, purely through system design and without
modifying the underlying models?
We accordingly organize our evaluation around these two
questions, first measuring the API cost and token consumption
of AoA against a conventional agent, Amazon’s Isabelle Agent
(RQ1), then testing whether it can prove theorems in Minilang
with a model predating the public release of the Minilang proof
corpus (RQ2).
A. RQ1: Cost of Proof Agents
To answer RQ1, we compare the cost of AoA against that of
a representative conventional proof agent, Amazon’s Isabelle
Agent. We first measure the overall difference in cost between
the two, and then analyze where that difference originates,
separating the contribution of our tree-edit interaction design
from that of the proof language itself.
1) Background: Although most existing proof agents are
built for Lean, AoA runs on Isabelle/HOL, the prover platform
on which Minilang is built. This makes the choice of baseline
delicate. A direct comparison with a Lean-based agent would
not only compare two agent designs, but also two different
prover ecosystems: Lean and Isabelle come with different
proof languages, automation facilities, libraries, and interac-
tion mechanisms. Such a comparison would therefore conflate
the effect of AoA’s agent design with that of the underlying
prover. To obtain a cleaner comparison, we instead evaluate
AoA against an agent on the same platform, Amazon’s Isabelle
Agent. This holds Isabelle/HOL and its automation ecosystem
fixed, allowing the comparison to focus more directly on the
proof language, interaction model, and agent architecture.
Amazon’s Isabelle Agent is a strong same-platform base-
line for this comparison. Developed by Amazon’s Automated
Reasoning Group as part of the open-source AutoCorrode
verification framework [20], it is an LLM agent for interactive
proof development in Isabelle/HOL. The system is profession-
ally engineered: it is integrated with Isabelle’s internals, and
provides tools for proof-state inspection, theorem search, and
Sledgehammer. It therefore represents a mature instance of the
conventional proof-agent design, in which the model edits Isar
proof text and retrieves the surrounding proof context through
separate tool calls. We use it as the baseline against which to
evaluate AoA’s tree-edit interaction model.
2) Benchmarks: We evaluate on two complementary bench-
marks. The first is MiniF2F [32], a standard benchmark for
LLM-based automated theorem proving. Although MiniF2F
primarily consists of competition-style mathematical prob-
lems, such as those from the IMO and AIME, it has become
one of the most widely used benchmarks for evaluating proof
agents. We therefore include it as a representative benchmark
for assessing general theorem-proving capability.
The second benchmark is NTP4VC-Pearl [33], which we
use to evaluate proof agents on verification-condition prov-
ing. NTP4VC-Pearl consists of verification conditions gener-
ated from verified programs written in Why3, a mature and
widely used industrial platform for deductive program veri-
fication. The benchmark covers compact but proof-intensive
verification examples, including algorithms, data structures,
calculation-heavy programs, engineering-style examples, and
verification-competition problems. We focus on Pearl because
it provides a realistic VC structure while remaining small
enough for controlled agent evaluation, and because its low
ATP pass rate makes it a challenging testbed for measuring
whether proof agents can reduce the manual proof burden in
program verification.
3) Experimental Setup: We run both AoA and Amazon’s
agent on the same Isabelle/HOL distribution, Isabelle2025-2,
and allocate 16 CPU cores to each run. This configuration is
intended to reflect a realistic desktop deployment scenario. For
both agents and on both benchmarks, each problem is given a
timeout of three hours.
Both agents are allowed to invoke all of Isabelle’s proof
automation, including Sledgehammer. Since Amazon’s agent
is optimized for Claude models, we prioritize Claude Opus
4.8 with high thinking effort as the underlying language
model for both agents. This removes the language model as a
confounding factor and lets the comparison focus on the agent
design, proof language, and interaction model. We note that
Amazon’s agent provides a memory mechanism, whereas the


TABLE II: Evaluation of AoA and Amazon’s agent.
agent
model
bench
token
cost
pass
AoA
Opus 4.8
miniF2F (all)
0.68M
$1.4
99.6%
Amazon’s
Opus 4.8
miniF2F (73)
3.27M
$17.2
89.0%
AoA
Opus 4.5
miniF2F (73)
1.44M
$1.5
98.6%
AoA
GPT 5.5
miniF2F (all)
0.19M
$0.4
99.2%
AoA
Opus 4.8
NTP4VC-P (50)
6.97M
$10.6
92.0%
AoA
Opus 4.8
NTP4VC-P (31)
9.07M
$13.9
93.6%
Amazon’s
Opus 4.8
NTP4VC-P (31)
8.28M
$32.0
48.4%
AoA
GPT 5.5
NTP4VC-P (all)
2.42M
$3.9
89.2%
AoA
GPT 5.5
NTP4VC-P (50)
2.56M
$4.2
92.0%
Amazon’s
GPT 5.5
NTP4VC-P (50)
4.03M
$12.7
38.0%
All the metrics are averaged per case, considering only passed cases.
current implementation of AoA does not.
The two agents differ in how they access the LLM API.
AoA uses Claude Code as its API provider and is run under
a subscription-based plan, for which we purchased $600 of
membership. Because Claude Code’s subscription pricing sub-
stantially discounts API usage, we do not impose an explicit
API-cost cap on AoA. In contrast, Amazon’s agent cannot be
run through Claude Code in its current implementation and
must instead call the Claude API directly. Since this leads to
substantially higher API cost, we impose a total budget of
$3000 for Amazon’s agent alone.
Even under these limits, evaluating Amazon’s agent on
the full benchmarks is beyond our available budget. We
therefore evaluate it on randomly sampled subsets: 73 MiniF2F
problems, covering approximately 30% of the benchmark,
and 50 NTP4VC-Pearl problems, covering approximately 18%
of the Pearl benchmark cases. The sampling ratio is lower
for NTP4VC-Pearl because this benchmark contains many
difficult verification conditions, which are expensive for both
AoA and Amazon’s agent to attempt.
4) Results on miniF2F: The results are reported in Ta-
ble II and Table III. On the selected 73 miniF2F problems,
AoA solves all cases, while Amazon’s agent solves 65 cases
(89.0%). Table III also reports, for each agent, the average
per-case total token consumption, input tokens, cached input
tokens, output tokens, API cost, and elapsed time.
One caveat in comparing API cost is input-cache reuse.
In the original runs, Amazon’s agent records zero cache,
because its implementation enables the caching feature only
on Amazon’s Bedrock platform rather than the Anthropic
API provider we use. Because cached input is substantially
cheaper, the original API costs conflate agent efficiency with
cache reuse. To remove this confounding factor, we also report
a normalized version of Amazon’s results (denoted “N” in
Table III), where we assume that Amazon’s agent achieves
the same input-cache rate as AoA, and recompute its cached
input tokens and resulting API cost.
For a more direct efficiency comparison, we further restrict
attention to the common success set, namely the miniF2F
problems solved by both agents, since statistics from failed
runs do not directly measure the cost of completing a proof.
The results show a substantial efficiency advantage for AoA
miniF2F
50k 200k
1M
5M
20M
0
25
50
75
100
Pass rate (%)
0.02
0.2
2
20
200
NTP4VC
100k
500k 2M
10M
50M
0
25
50
75
100
Per-case total tokens
Pass rate (%)
0.2
1
5
20
100
Per-case cost (USD)
AoA (Opus 4.8)
Amazon's (Opus 4.8)
AoA (Opus 4.5)
Fig. 4: Pass rate under increasing per-case budgets.
across all the economic metrics. On the common success
set, Amazon’s agent consumes 6.9× as many total tokens as
AoA. Even after normalizing away the cache-reuse difference,
Amazon’s API cost remains 4.7× that of AoA. Moreover,
AoA’s advantage is not limited to monetary cost: AoA also
completes the common successful cases in roughly half the
elapsed time of Amazon’s agent, taking 371 seconds per case
compared with Amazon’s 730 seconds.
5) Results on NTP4VC: The results on the 50 NTP4VC-
Pearl problems are also reported in Table II and Table III.
This benchmark is substantially harder than miniF2F and is
therefore much more expensive for Amazon’s agent to evalu-
ate. To make the evaluation more cost-efficient, we modified
Amazon’s agent to set cache_control in its API requests,
thereby enabling the API provider’s automatic input-cache
mechanism [34]. Even with this modification, however, the
cost of evaluating Amazon’s agent had already exceeded USD
1,500 after completing only 31 cases, forcing us to stop the
Claude-based experiment early. Instead, we completed the full
50-case evaluation using GPT-5.5, for which we had access to
substantially larger quota. This full evaluation, including the
runs of AoA, consumed about 1B tokens in total.
The results show that AoA substantially outperforms Ama-
zon’s agent in pass rate, while solving all cases solved by
Amazon’s agent. As in the miniF2F analysis, to ensure a
fair comparison, we again compare the two agents on their
common success set (Table III). The results exhibit the same
overall pattern as on miniF2F: AoA achieves multi-fold im-
provements across all metrics, while also finishing faster.
6) Analysis: We further analyze the source of AoA’s ad-
vantage. A natural question is whether this advantage depends
on the difficulty of the proof goals. To examine this, we
plot the cumulative pass rate as a function of the per-case
budget in Fig. 4. Each point in the plot reports the fraction
of problems solved within a given token budget and a tool-
call number limit. Read inversely, the plot shows how the
required budget grows as we move to increasingly difficult


TABLE III: Comparing Detailed Metrics of AoA and Amazon’s agent on the common success sets.
agent
model
bench. (#) note
total tok.
input tok.
cached
output tok.
cost
# tool
time (min)
AoA
Opus 4.8
miniF2F
(common
success)
-
0.48M (1x)
0.47M (1x)
0.41M (1x)
18k (1x)
$1.0 (1x)
17.7 (1x)
6.2 (1x)
Amazon’s
O
3.34M (6.9x)
3.30M (7.1x)
0
40k (2.3x)
$17.5 (17.9x)
157.3 (8.9x)
12.2 (2.0x)
Amazon’s
N
-
-
2.87M (6.9x)
-
$4.6 (4.7x)
-
-
AoA
Opus 4.8
NTP4VC-P
(common
success)
-
2.44M (1x)
2.37M (1x)
2.24M (1x)
65.7k (1x)
$3.6 (1x)
37.3 (1x)
18.1 (1x)
Amazon’s
C
8.28M (3.4x)
8.21M (3.5x)
2.41M (1.1x)
70.5k (1.1x)
$32.0 (9.0x)
239.4 (6.4x)
24.7 (1.4x)
Amazon’s
N
-
-
7.72M (3.5x)
-
$8.1 (2.3x)
-
-
AoA
GPT 5.5
NTP4VC-P
(common
success)
-
1.41M (1x)
1.39M (1x)
1.17M (1x)
18k (1x)
$2.2 (1x)
50.3 (1x)
16.5 (1x)
Amazon’s
C
4.03M (2.9x)
3.98M (2.9x)
1.92M (1.6x)
49k (2.7x)
$12.7 (5.7x)
194.0 (3.9x)
32.1 (1.9x)
Amazon’s
N
-
-
3.30M (2.8x)
-
$6.6 (2.9x)
-
-
Note: O denotes the original result of Amazon’s agent; N denotes the normalized result under the same input-cache rate as AoA; C denotes our modified
implementation with inserted cache-control directives. All the metrics are averaged per case. “-” symbol in N rows means the digit is unchanged.
proof goals. On miniF2F, where Amazon’s agent eventually
performs well, the budget gap between the two agents remains
relatively uniform as we move toward higher pass-rate levels.
On NTP4VC, however, the gap becomes much larger at harder
proof goals. These results suggest that harder proof goals can
amplify AoA’s advantage.
Table III further shows that AoA’s reduction in total token
consumption comes mainly from input tokens. This matches
the intuition behind our design: conventional agents spend
many tokens repeatedly navigating source files and querying
proof states, whereas AoA exposes the same information more
effectively through the structured proof tree. To examine this
mechanism more directly, we measure, over the entire LLM
session, the input-token footprint of the tool outputs used
for source-code reading and proof-state access. For Amazon’s
agent, we count the outputs of tools that read proof source
and inspect proof states (get_goal_state, get_errors,
read_theory, ... the full list is in our supplementary
material). For AoA, we count the outputs of READ, which
returns the complete proof tree or a requested subtree, and
EDIT, whose response contains the incremental proof-state
quick view. The results are consistent with this explanation. On
the common success set of NTP4VC with GPT-5.5, Amazon’s
relevant tool outputs consume 4.1M input tokens per problem
on average (63.2% of the total input), whereas AoA’s consume
only 1.4M (34.0%). This means that AoA not only reduces the
absolute input-token cost of communicating proof context to
the model, but also leaves a larger fraction of the input budget
for the model’s own reasoning history. This reduction accounts
for part of AoA’s overall advantage in Table III.
Before answering RQ1, we emphasize one caveat: AoA’s
advantage comes from two tightly coupled design choices:
Minilang and the tree-edit model. There is no clean ablation
that can separate their individual contributions. On the one
hand, building a conventional text-editing agent for Minilang
and comparing it with an Isar-based agent would be unfair to
Minilang, because it is a new language and general-purpose
LLMs do not have the same prior familiarity with it as they
do with Isar (Isabelle’s original proof language). On the other
hand, removing Minilang and applying the tree-edit model
directly to Isar is also difficult. Unlike Minilang, whose proof
model is kept uniformly declarative, Isar interleaves declara-
tive proof steps, tactical goal refinement, and fact chaining;
fully encoding this multi-mode proof model, together with
Isar’s rich and diverse syntax, into a JSON schema would
make the interface large and unwieldy, likely undermining the
LLM efficiency that the tree-edit model is meant to improve.
Putting together the results in § IV-A4, § IV-A5 and the
analysis in this subsection, we now answer RQ1.
Answer to RQ1. Redesigning the proof language and
exposing its AST through a JSON representation within a tree-
edit proof model provides an effective way to reduce proof-
agent cost. AoA serves as a concrete instance of this approach.
B. RQ2: Proving in Minilang Without Corpus-Scale Exposure
The experiments in the previous section already provide
evidence that AoA can operate effectively over Minilang with
Claude Opus 4.8 and GPT-5.5. However, they do not fully rule
out a possible data-contamination explanation. Minilang itself
comes with a corpus of about 340K proofs, released publicly
on Hugging Face [35]. It is therefore difficult to exclude the
possibility that those LLMs have absorbed part of this corpus
during training, and have thereby acquired some familiarity
with Minilang.
To address this concern, we conduct an additional experi-
ment on miniF2F using Claude Opus 4.5, which was released
on Nov. 24, 2025, before the public release of the Minilang
corpus on Dec. 22, 2025 [35]. This setting therefore rules out
training on the publicly released Minilang corpus.
We evaluate Claude Opus 4.5 on the same selected miniF2F
cases and under the same setting as § IV-A. The results are
reported in Table II and Fig. 4. AoA still achieves a pass
rate of 98.6%, even though the underlying model predates
the public release of the Minilang corpus. If we extend the
time limit to 4.5h, the pass rate reaches 100%. Moreover,
its resource statistics, including total token consumption and
API cost, are not excessively worse than those obtained with
Claude Opus 4.8. Considering that Opus 4.5 and Opus 4.8
are separated by three model versions and roughly half a year
of development, the observed differences in these statistics
can be reasonably attributed to the capability gap between the
underlying language models.


These results provide direct evidence for an affirmative
answer to RQ2 in the case of Minilang.
Answer to RQ2. At least for Minilang, the answer is affir-
mative. By extracting the semantics of the proof language and
the prover interaction, and re-expressing them in forms more
natural for LLMs to manipulate, we can build an effective
proof agent even with an underlying LLM that was not trained
on a corpus-scale collection of Minilang proofs.
This conclusion should be read with the scope of Minilang
in mind. Minilang is designed so that its statements and proof
steps stay close to natural-language mathematical reasoning.
The experiment therefore does not by itself show that the same
approach applies to arbitrary formal languages, especially
those farther from reasoning patterns familiar to LLMs.
Nevertheless, the result provides a useful direction for the
design of proof agents for new languages. It suggests that,
when developing proof languages and formal languages more
broadly, one can make them more amenable to LLM agents by
exposing their semantic structure through explicit, structured,
and LLM-friendly interfaces, rather than relying solely on
model retraining or prior exposure to the concrete syntax.
C. Threats to Validity
Several threats may affect the interpretation of our results.
First, our benchmarks may not fully represent all theorem-
proving and software-verification workloads. MiniF2F mainly
consists of mathematical problems, while NTP4VC-Pearl is
closer to verification-condition proving but is derived from
Why3 as a single verification framework. AoA may behave
differently on VCs generated by other verifiers, with differ-
ent encoding styles, background theories, or proof-obligation
structures. Second, the high cost of running the baseline
limits its evaluation to sampled subsets, which may affect
the statistical stability of the aggregate results. We mitigate
this threat by using random sampling, reporting pass rates
separately from resource metrics, and comparing resource
usage on the common success sets. Third, our comparison uses
Amazon’s agent as the same-platform representative of con-
ventional proof agents. This avoids confounding Isabelle/HOL
with other prover platforms, but it also means that the results
may not directly transfer to other agents.
V. RELATED WORK
This section situates AoA with respect to four lines of re-
lated work: conventional proof agents, tree-editing techniques
for code generation, tree-editing interfaces for interactive the-
orem proving, and fine-tuning-based theorem-proving models.
A. Conventional Proof Agents
The conventional proof-agent paradigm has already been
characterized in § II-B, so we only list representative systems
here. Representative works include checker-in-the-loop proof-
script generators [19], [36], agents that add iterative refine-
ment, memory, library search, or coding-agent infrastructure
[8], [16], and more recent systems that incorporate decom-
position and planning [37]–[39]. In Isabelle/HOL, Amazon’s
Isabelle Agent [20] provides the closest same-platform repre-
sentative of this conventional paradigm, as discussed in § II-B.
B. AST-Based Program Generation and Agents
A related line of work in program generation uses the
abstract syntax of the target language as the model’s output
interface, rather than asking the model to directly emit a se-
quence of concrete-syntax tokens. Representative systems such
as Abstract Syntax Networks [40], Tree-to-Tree networks [41],
TRANX [42], and TreeGen [43] generate programs through
AST nodes, grammar actions, or grammar-aware tree struc-
tures, thereby turning program construction into a sequence of
language-level structural decisions rather than unconstrained
surface-token prediction. Another related line of work aligns
compiler feedback with structured program representations.
For example, program-repair systems such as Graph2Diff [44]
and DrRepair [45] connect compiler diagnostics or error
messages with code structures, showing that feedback from
language tools can be incorporated into the representation on
which a model reasons. Finally, recent coding agents [46],
[47] demonstrate the usefulness of closing the loop with tools,
compiler messages, tests, and repository navigation. Together,
these works show that program-generation systems can benefit
both from exposing abstract syntax to the model and from
making external tool feedback available during generation or
repair. AoA is inspired by these ideas, but applies them to
interactive theorem proving.
C. Tree-Structured Proofs in Interactive Theorem Proving
Tree-structured proofs have a long history in logic and inter-
active theorem proving. In proof theory, natural-deduction and
sequent-calculus presentations organize derivations as trees of
inference-rule applications, with branches corresponding to
subderivations. This perspective has also influenced interactive
proof environments. Proof by Pointing [48] uses locations
in a goal sequent to guide the construction of a proof tree.
ProofViz [49] visualizes proof trees with node information and
partial proof terms, supporting interactive proof exploration.
HenBlocks [50] further explores structured proof construction
through a Blockly-based editor for Coq. AoA builds on this
broader tradition of tree-structured proof presentation and
construction, but exposes the tree as the working object of
an LLM agent, with proof states and prover messages stored
at the nodes that the agent reads and edits.
D. Finetuning-based Theorem Proving Models
As an LLM-powered approach to theorem proving, AoA is
also related to the growing line of fine-tuning-based theorem-
proving models. Recent theorem-proving models are primarily
fine-tuned for Lean, including Pythagoras-Prover [51], Goedel-
Prover-V2 [52], DeepSeek-Prover-V2 [6], and others [53]–
[56]. These models are typically trained with specialised Lean-
oriented data synthesis pipelines, followed by reinforcement
learning. Recent work has also used Lean-verified instances
to improve informal reasoning [57]. However, these models
mainly excel on certain benchmarks such as MiniF2F [32],


while struggling to generalise to broader complex bench-
marks [14], [33], [58], [59].
VI. CONCLUSION AND AN OPEN PROBLEM
This paper presents AoA, a proof agent built on a tree-edit
interface over Minilang’s abstract syntax tree. Through AoA,
we show that proof agents need not necessarily rely on corpus-
scale prior familiarity with a proof language’s concrete syntax:
by exposing the language’s semantic structure in an LLM-
friendly form, the efficiency benefits of a redesigned proof
language can be extended to general-purpose, non-finetuned
LLM agents, substantially lowering the API cost.
This work focuses on a proof language. Given the close
analogy between proof languages and programming languages,
an open question is whether the same agent-over-AST method-
ology can also benefit coding agents, especially for newly
designed experimental languages whose concrete syntax is not
yet familiar to existing LLMs. We leave this for future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The implementation of AoA is publicly available at https:
//github.com/xqyww123/Isa-Mini/tree/main/IsaMini/AoA.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Polu and I. Sutskever, “Generative language modeling for automated
theorem proving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.
[2] K. Yang, A. Swope, A. Gu, R. Chalamala, P. Song, S. Yu, S. Godil,
R. J. Prenger, and A. Anandkumar, “Leandojo: Theorem proving with
retrieval-augmented language models,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 21 573–21 612, 2023.
[3] M. Sammler, R. Lepigre, R. Krebbers, K. Memarian, D. Dreyer, and
D. Garg, “Refinedc: automating the foundational verification of c
code with refined ownership types,” in Proceedings of the 42nd ACM
SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation, 2021, pp. 158–174.
[4] V. Gladshtein, G. Pˆırlea, Q. Zhao, V. Kurin, and I. Sergey, “Foundational
multi-modal program verifiers,” Proc. ACM Program. Lang., vol. 10, no.
POPL, Jan. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3776719
[5] J. Chen, W. Chen, J. Du, J. Hu, Z. Jiang, A. Jie, X. Jin, X. Jin, C. Li,
W. Shi, Z. Wang, M. Wang, C. Wei, S. Wei, H. Xin, F. Yang, W. Gao,
Z. Yuan, T. Zhan, Z. Zheng, T. Zhou, and T. H. Zhu, “Seed-prover
1.5: Mastering undergraduate-level theorem proving via learning from
experience,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.17260
[6] Z.
Z.
Ren,
Z.
Shao,
J.
Song,
H.
Xin,
H.
Wang,
W.
Zhao,
L. Zhang, Z. Fu, Q. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. F. Wu, Z. Gou, S. Ma,
H. Tang, Y. Liu, W. Gao, D. Guo, and C. Ruan, “DeepSeek-Prover-
V2: Advancing Formal Mathematical Reasoning via Reinforcement
Learning for Subgoal Decomposition,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21801
[7] B. Requena, A. Letson, K. Nowakowski, I. B. Ferreiro, and L. Sarra, “A
minimal agent for automated theorem proving,” in ICLR 2026 Workshop:
VerifAI-2: The Second Workshop on AI Verification in the Wild, 2026.
[Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=E30g7bO7rU
[8] J. Liu, Z. Zhou, Z. Zhu, M. D. Santos, W. He, J. Liu, R. Wang,
Y. Xie, J. Zhao, Q. Wang, L. Zhi, J. Li, and W. Li, “Numina-
lean-agent: An open and general agentic reasoning system for formal
mathematics,” CoRR, vol. abs/2601.14027, 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2601.14027
[9] Y. Ren, J. Li, and Y. Qi, “Merlean: An agentic framework for
autoformalization in quantum computation,” 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.16554
[10] B. Rao, W. Eiers, and C. Lipizzi, “Neural theorem proving: Generating
and
structuring
proofs
for
formal
verification,”
in
Proceedings
of The 19th International Conference on Neurosymbolic Learning
and Reasoning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
L. H. Gilpin, E. Giunchiglia, P. Hitzler, and E. van Krieken, Eds.,
vol. 284.
PMLR, 08–10 Sep 2025, pp. 814–829. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v284/rao25a.html
[11] Y. Xin, Q. Chen, G. Durrett, and I. Dillig, “Verisoftbench: Repository-
scale
formal
verification
benchmarks
for
lean,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2602.18307, 2026.
[12] Logical Intelligence, “Aleph prover: State-of-the-art formal theorem
prover,” https://logicalintelligence.com/aleph-prover, 2025, accessed:
2026-06-21.
[13] G. Tsoukalas, J. Lee, J. Jennings, J. Xin, M. Ding, M. Jennings,
A. Thakur, and S. Chaudhuri, “Putnambench: Evaluating neural
theorem-provers on the putnam mathematical competition,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 11 545–11 569,
2024.
[14] Mathematical Association of America, “William Lowell Putnam Math-
ematical Competition,” https://maa.org/putnam/, accessed: 2026-05-23.
[15] Trishul Lab, “Putnambench leaderboard,” https://trishullab.github.io/
PutnamBench/leaderboard.html, 2026, accessed: 2026-05-22.
[16] B. Requena, A. Letson, K. Nowakowski, I. Beltran-Ferreiro, and
L. Sarra, “A minimal agent for automated theorem proving,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.24273, 2026.
[17] H. Ju, G. Gao, J. Jiang, B. Wu, Z. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Wang,
Y. Wang, Z. Wang, W. He, P. Wu, L. Xiao, R. Liu, B. Dai, and
B. Dong, “Automated conjecture resolution with formal verification,”
2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.03789
[18] Q. Xu, R. Wang, P. Wang, H. Li, and C. Watt, “A minimalist proof
language for neural theorem proving over Isabelle/HOL,” Proceedings
of the ACM on Programming Languages, vol. 10, no. OOPSLA1, pp.
2073–2098, 2026, also available as arXiv:2507.18885.
[19] A. Kozyrev, G. Solovev, N. Khramov, and A. Podkopaev, “Coqpilot,
a plugin for llm-based generation of proofs,” in Proceedings of the


39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering, ser. ASE ’24.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 2382–2385. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3691620.3695357
[20] H. Becker, N. Chong, R. Dockins, J. Grundy, J. Z. S. Hu, I. Mulder,
D. P. Mulligan, P. Mure, L. C. Paulson, and K. Slind, “AutoCorrode
software verification framework for Isabelle/HOL,” https://github.com/
awslabs/autocorrode, 2025.
[21] T.
Fu,
R.
Ferrando,
J.
Conde,
C.
Arriaga,
and
P.
Reviriego,
“Why do large language models (LLMs) struggle to count letters?”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18626, 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2412.18626
[22] L. Edman, H. Schmid, and A. Fraser, “CUTE: Measuring LLMs’
understanding of their tokens,” in Proceedings of the 2024 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://aclanthology.org/2024.emnlp-main.177/
[23] J. A. Robinson, “A machine-oriented logic based on the resolution
principle,” Journal of the ACM, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 23–41, 1965.
[24] L. Bachmair and H. Ganzinger, “Rewrite-based equational theorem
proving with selection and simplification,” Journal of Logic and Com-
putation, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 217–247, 1994.
[25] R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras, and C. Tinelli, “Solving SAT and SAT
modulo theories: From an abstract Davis–Putnam–Logemann–Loveland
procedure to DPLL(T),” Journal of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 937–
977, 2006.
[26] Y. Wu, A. Q. Jiang, W. Li, M. N. Rabe, C. Staats, M. Jamnik,
and C. Szegedy, “Autoformalization with large language models,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS
2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022,
2022. [Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper files/paper/2022/
hash/d0c6bc641a56bebee9d985b937307367-Abstract-Conference.html
[27] A. Q. Jiang, S. Welleck, J. P. Zhou, T. Lacroix, J. Liu, W. Li,
M. Jamnik, G. Lample, and Y. Wu, “Draft, sketch, and prove:
Guiding formal theorem provers with informal proofs,” in The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023,
Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023.
OpenReview.net, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=SMa9EAovKMC
[28] L. de Moura and N. Bjørner, “Z3: An efficient SMT solver,” in Tools
and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS
2008), ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4963.
Springer,
2008, pp. 337–340.
[29] H. Barbosa, C. Barrett, M. Brain, G. Kremer, H. Lachnitt, M. Mann,
A. Mohamed, M. Mohamed, A. Niemetz, A. N¨otzli, A. Ozdemir,
M. Preiner, A. Reynolds, Y. Sheng, C. Tinelli, and Y. Zohar, “cvc5: A
versatile and industrial-strength SMT solver,” in Tools and Algorithms
for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS 2022), ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13243.
Springer, 2022, pp. 415–442.
[30] S. Schulz, S. Cruanes, and P. Vukmirovi´c, “Faster, higher, stronger:
E 2.3,” in Automated Deduction – CADE 27, ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 11716.
Springer, 2019, pp. 495–507.
[31] J. Hurd, “First-order proof tactics in higher-order logic theorem provers,”
in Design and Application of Strategies/Tactics in Higher Order Logics
(STRATA 2003), ser. NASA Conference Publication, no. NASA/CP-
2003-212448, 2003, pp. 56–68.
[32] K. Zheng, J. M. Han, and S. Polu, “MiniF2F: a cross-system
benchmark for formal Olympiad-level mathematics,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=9ZPegFuFTFv
[33] Q. Xu, X. Luan, R. Wang, J. O. J. Leang, P. Wang, H. Li, W. Li,
and C. Watt, “Neural theorem proving for verification conditions: A
real-world benchmark,” CoRR, vol. abs/2601.18944, 2026. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2601.18944
[34] Anthropic,
“Prompt
caching,”
Claude
Platform
Documentation,
https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/build-with-claude/prompt-caching,
accessed 2026-06-21.
[35] A
Neural
Theorem
Proving
Group,
“Minilang-afp-v1,”
https://
huggingface.co/datasets/ANTPG/Minilang-AFP-v1, Dec. 2025, hugging
Face dataset. License: CC-BY-4.0.
[36] A. Thakur, G. Tsoukalas, Y. Wen, J. Xin, and S. Chaudhuri,
“An
in-context
learning
agent
for
formal
theorem-proving,”
in
First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=V7HRrxXUhN
[37] K. Baba, C. Liu, S. Kurita, and A. Sannai, “Prover agent: An agent-based
framework for formal mathematical proofs,” CoRR, vol. abs/2506.19923,
2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.19923
[38] J. Saad-Falcon, A. G. Lafuente, S. Natarajan, N. Maru, H. Todorov,
E. K. Guha, E. K. Buchanan, M. F. Chen, N. Guha, C. R´e,
and A. Mirhoseini, “Archon: An architecture search framework for
inference-time techniques,” CoRR, vol. abs/2409.15254, 2024. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2409.15254
[39] P.-N. Kung, L. Song, D. Hwang, J. Yoon, C.-L. Li, S. Severini,
M. Olˇs´ak, E. Lockhart, Q. V. Le, B. Gokturk et al., “Leap: Supercharging
llms for formal mathematics with agentic frameworks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2606.03303, 2026.
[40] M. Rabinovich, M. Stern, and D. Klein, “Abstract syntax networks
for code generation and semantic parsing,” in Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), R. Barzilay and M.-Y. Kan, Eds.
Vancouver,
Canada: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2017, pp.
1139–1149. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/P17-1105/
[41] X. Chen, C. Liu, and D. Song, “Tree-to-tree neural networks for program
translation,” in Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, ser. NIPS’18.
Red Hook, NY,
USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2018, p. 2552–2562.
[42] P. Yin and G. Neubig, “TRANX: A transition-based neural abstract
syntax parser for semantic parsing and code generation,” in Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP 2018: System Demonstrations, Brussels, Belgium,
October 31 - November 4, 2018, E. Blanco and W. Lu, Eds.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018, pp. 7–12. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/d18-2002
[43] Z. Sun, Q. Zhu, Y. Xiong, Y. Sun, L. Mou, and L. Zhang, “Treegen:
A tree-based transformer architecture for code generation,” in The
Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2020,
The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence
Conference, IAAI 2020, The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New York, NY, USA,
February 7-12, 2020.
AAAI Press, 2020, pp. 8984–8991. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v34i05.6430
[44] D. Tarlow, S. Moitra, A. Rice, Z. Chen, P. Manzagol, C. Sutton,
and E. Aftandilian, “Learning to fix build errors with graph2diff
neural networks,” in ICSE ’20: 42nd International Conference on
Software Engineering, Workshops, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 27 June
- 19 July, 2020.
ACM, 2020, pp. 19–20. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3387940.3392181
[45] M. Yasunaga and P. Liang, “Graph-based, self-supervised program repair
from diagnostic feedback,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning.
PMLR, 2020, pp. 10 799–10 808.
[46] K. Team, Y. Bai, Y. Bao, Y. Charles, C. Chen, G. Chen, H. Chen,
H. Chen, J. Chen, N. Chen et al., “Kimi k2: Open agentic intelligence,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.20534, 2025.
[47] A. Zeng, X. Lv, Z. Hou, Z. Du, Q. Zheng, B. Chen, D. Yin, C. Ge,
C. Huang, C. Xie et al., “Glm-5: from vibe coding to agentic engineer-
ing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15763, 2026.
[48] Y. Bertot, G. Kahn, and L. Th´ery, “Proof by pointing,” in Theoretical
Aspects of Computer Software, M. Hagiya and J. C. Mitchell, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1994, pp. 141–160.
[49] D. Melcer and S. Chang, “Proofviz: An interactive visual proof ex-
plorer,” in Trends in Functional Programming, V. Zs´ok and J. Hughes,
Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 116–135.
[50] B. Boey and M. D. Adams, “Henblocks: Structured editing for coq,” in
The Coq Workshop, vol. 2022, 2022, p. 2.
[51] J. O. J. Leang, Z. Zhao, M. C. Stoian, Q. Xu, H. Li, W. Li, S. B.
Cohen, and E. Giunchiglia, “Pythagoras-prover: Advancing efficient
formal proving via augmented lean formalisation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2606.12594, 2026.
[52] Y. Lin, S. Tang, B. Lyu, Z. Yang, J.-H. Chung, H. Zhao, L. Jiang,
Y. Geng, J. Ge, J. Sun, J. Wu, J. Gesi, X. Lu, D. Acuna,
K.
Yang,
H.
Lin,
Y.
Choi,
D.
Chen,
S.
Arora,
and
C.
Jin,
“Goedel-Prover-V2: Scaling Formal Theorem Proving with Scaffolded
Data Synthesis and Self-Correction,” in The Fourteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=j4C0nALrgK
[53] H. Wang, M. Unsal, X. Lin, M. Baksys, J. Liu, M. D. Santos,
F. Sung, M. Vinyes, Z. Ying, Z. Zhu, J. Lu, H. de Saxc´e, B. Bailey,
C. Song, C. Xiao, D. Zhang, E. Zhang, F. Pu, H. Zhu, J. Liu,


J. Bayer, J. Michel, L. Yu, L. Dreyfus-Schmidt, L. Tunstall, L. Pagani,
M. Machado, P. Bourigault, R. Wang, S. Polu, T. Barroyer, W.-D.
Li, Y. Niu, Y. Fleureau, Y. Hu, Z. Yu, Z. Wang, Z. Yang, Z. Liu,
and J. Li, “Kimina-Prover Preview: Towards Large Formal Reasoning
Models with Reinforcement Learning,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.11354
[54] D. Ma, K. Ma, S. Guo, Y. Shi, E. Zhao, J. Shi, Z. Zhang, G. Cheung,
J. Liu, and Z. Wang, “Oprover: A unified framework for agentic formal
theorem proving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.17283, 2026.
[55] J. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Guo, L. Guo, R. Li, C. Zhang, C. Peng,
C. Wang, D. Zhao, J. Shi, J. Wang, L. Feng, M. Shen, Q. Li,
S. An, S. Wang, W. Shi, X. Xi, X. Li, X. Cao, Y. Lu, Y. Zhao,
Z. Chen, Z. Lin, W. Wang, P. Pei, and X. Cai, “Longcat-flash-
prover: Advancing native formal reasoning via agentic tool-integrated
reinforcement learning,” CoRR, vol. abs/2603.21065, 2026. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2603.21065
[56] K. Dong and T. Ma, “STP: self-play LLM theorem provers with iterative
conjecturing and proving,” in Forty-second International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2025, Vancouver, BC, Canada, July 13-19,
2025, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Singh,
M. Fazel, D. Hsu, S. Lacoste-Julien, F. Berkenkamp, T. Maharaj,
K. Wagstaff, and J. Zhu, Eds., vol. 267. PMLR / OpenReview.net, 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dong25h.html
[57] J. O. J. Leang, G. Hong, W. Li, and S. B. Cohen, “Theorem prover
as a judge for synthetic data generation,” in Proceedings of the
63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), W. Che, J. Nabende, E. Shutova, and
M. T. Pilehvar, Eds.
Vienna, Austria: Association for Computational
Linguistics, Jul. 2025, pp. 29 941–29 977. [Online]. Available: https:
//aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1448/
[58] J. Jiang, W. He, Y. Wang, G. Gao, Y. Hu, J. Wang, N. Guan,
P. Wu, C. Dai, L. Xiao, and B. Dong, “FATE: A formal benchmark
series for frontier algebra of multiple difficulty levels,” CoRR, vol.
abs/2511.02872, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2511.02872
[59] Z. Azerbayev, B. Piotrowski, H. Schoelkopf, E. W. Ayers, D. Radev,
and J. Avigad, “Proofnet: Autoformalizing and formally proving
undergraduate-level mathematics,” CoRR, vol. abs/2302.12433, 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.12433
