Euclid-MCP: A Model Context Protocol Server for
Deterministic Logical Reasoning via Prolog
Bartolomeo Bogliolo
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) excel at natural language under-
standing and generation but remain unreliable for multi-step logical
reasoning, especially in safety-critical or compliance-sensitive domains.
Recent neuro-symbolic approaches address this gap by coupling neu-
ral models with external symbolic engines, yet most integrations are
bespoke and lack a standardized interface for tool-augmented agents.
This paper presents Euclid-MCP, an open-source MCP server that
provides deterministic logical reasoning via SWI-Prolog.
Euclid-MCP introduces Euclid-IR, an engine-agnostic interme-
diate representation for Horn-clause logic that is human-readable, easy
for LLMs to generate, and straightforward to compile into Prolog or
alternative backends. The server exposes a compact tool interface that
supports a translate-run-inspect-repair loop, enabling LLM clients to
delegate inference while retaining full access to proof traces and deriva-
tion logs.
We evaluate Euclid-MCP on a realistic IT security and compliance
use case. Results show that while LLMs alone are sufficient on small
knowledge bases, they hallucinate systematically on larger problems,
whereas Euclid-MCP delivers exact answers with lower latency and
more compact outputs. We argue that semantic RAG is fundamentally
unsuited for rule enforcement, and that Euclid-MCP can serve as a
stable, shared reasoning substrate for both RAG-based assistants and
agentic systems.
1
Introduction
The rapid progress of Large Language Models (LLMs) has transformed many
aspects of natural language processing, from question answering and sum-
marization to code generation and agent-like interaction. However, when
tasks require multi-step logical deduction, strict adherence to formal
1
arXiv:2607.21412v1  [cs.AI]  23 Jul 2026


rules, or auditable decision traces, purely neural approaches exhibit well-
documented limitations: non-deterministic outputs, susceptibility to halluci-
nation, and difficulty in providing faithful reasoning proofs. These issues are
particularly acute in domains such as business rule enforcement, reg-
ulatory compliance, and security policy verification, where decisions
must be both correct and explainable.
A growing body of research addresses these shortcomings through neuro-
symbolic AI, which combines the pattern-recognition strengths of neural
models with the rigor of symbolic reasoning. One prominent direction del-
egates inference to external solvers—such as SAT/SMT solvers, constraint
programming systems, or logic programming engines—while relying on the
LLM to translate informal problem descriptions into a formal representa-
tion.
Recent work has shown that grounding LLM reasoning in Prolog
can significantly improve both answer accuracy and the reliability of rea-
soning proofs [3, 4], provided the translation from natural language to logic
is sufficiently accurate. At the same time, the emerging Model Context
Protocol (MCP) offers a standardized way for LLM applications to dis-
cover and invoke external tools and data sources [5], but few existing MCP
servers expose formal reasoning engines as first-class, reusable components.
Our project originated from the observation that retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) based on semantic similarity is fundamentally mismatched
to rule-centric tasks, where decisions must follow logically from explicit poli-
cies rather than from approximate textual similarity. This paper introduces
Euclid-MCP, an open-source MCP server that provides deterministic
logical reasoning via Prolog for any MCP-capable LLM client. Euclid-
MCP implements a hybrid cognitive architecture in which a lightweight LLM
describes the world in terms of facts and rules, while a deterministic Prolog
engine performs the actual deduction. The system’s core contributions are:
• A high-level logical description language (Euclid-IR) for expressing
business rules, security policies, and other domain constraints in a human-
readable, declarative form.
• An automatic translation layer that compiles these descriptions into ex-
ecutable SWI-Prolog clauses, preserving structure and enabling straight-
forward auditing.
• A compact MCP tool interface that exposes reasoning operations (de-
duction, diagnosis, scenario analysis, validation) and supports a structured
translate-run-inspect-repair loop, including access to proof trees for inter-
pretability.
2


• Representative use cases demonstrating how Euclid-MCP can be used
to enforce business rules and verify security policies in a transparent, ver-
ifiable manner.
Euclid-MCP originated from a practical limitation encountered when
applying retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to business rule enforce-
ment. In this setting, queries must be matched against a corpus of formal or
semi-formal rules, and decisions must follow logically from those rules rather
than from approximate semantic similarity. Standard RAG pipelines, which
rely on vector search and nearest-neighbor retrieval, proved inadequate: they
could surface “similar” rules but could not guarantee that the retrieved sub-
set was logically sufficient or consistent, nor could they provide formal proofs
of the derived conclusions. In effect, semantic search behaved like “using a
drill to hammer a nail”: powerful, but mismatched to the task.
This observation led us to revisit rule-based expert systems and logic
programming, where knowledge is encoded as explicit rules and inference
is performed by a deterministic engine capable of deriving and explaining
conclusions. Building on this foundation, we designed Euclid-MCP as an
MCP server that exposes a Prolog-based reasoning engine to LLM clients.
While recent work such as PrologMCP [12] and LogicLease [4] also explores
the integration of Prolog with LLMs and MCP, Euclid-MCP is primarily
motivated by the need to overcome the limitations of semantic retrieval in
rule-centric applications, and it emphasizes a domain-oriented logical de-
scription layer tailored to business and security policies.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews
background and related work on neuro-symbolic AI, logic programming, and
MCP. Section 3 describes the Euclid-MCP architecture, including the log-
ical description language, translation to Prolog, and MCP integration. Sec-
tion 4 presents use cases in business rule enforcement and security policy
verification. Section 5 discusses benefits, limitations, and relations to exist-
ing systems. Section 6 concludes.
2
Background and Related Work
This section situates Euclid-MCP at the intersection of three strands of
research and practice: (i) the limitations of retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) for rule-centric tasks, (ii) the tradition of rule-based expert systems
and logic programming, and (iii) recent neuro-symbolic approaches that com-
bine LLMs with formal reasoning engines. We also briefly review the Model
Context Protocol (MCP) as an emerging standard for tool integration.
3


2.1
Retrieval-Augmented Generation and Its Limits for Rules
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has become a dominant pattern for
grounding LLMs in external knowledge. In a typical RAG pipeline, a user
query is embedded into a vector space, similar documents or passages are
retrieved via approximate nearest-neighbor search, and the LLM conditions
its generation on this retrieved context. This approach works well for open-
ended question answering, summarization, and many knowledge-intensive
tasks where “semantic similarity” is a good proxy for relevance.
However, RAG based on semantic similarity is fundamentally mismatched
to rule-centric applications, such as business rule enforcement, policy
compliance, and security constraint verification. In these settings:
• Correctness depends on logical consequence: a decision must follow
from an explicit set of rules and facts, not from textual similarity.
• The retrieved subset of rules must be logically sufficient and consis-
tent with respect to the query; nearest-neighbor retrieval provides no such
guarantees.
• Auditing and explainability require formal proofs or at least traceable
derivations, not just “the model saw similar rules in the context.”
Recent analyses of RAG in practice highlight these failure modes: se-
mantic retrieval can surface superficially relevant rules while missing critical
exceptions, interactions, or negations, leading to inconsistent or unsafe con-
clusions. In effect, using semantic search to enforce formal rules is akin to
“using a drill to hammer a nail”: the tool is powerful, but the underlying
operation (approximate matching vs. logical inference) is wrong for the task.
These limitations motivate architectures in which retrieval is comple-
mented or replaced by a symbolic reasoning layer that can guarantee
logical correctness and provide explicit derivation traces.
2.2
Rule-Based Expert Systems and Logic Programming
Before the current LLM era, expert systems were the dominant paradigm
for encoding and automating domain expertise, particularly in settings re-
quiring rigorous rule application and explainability. Knowledge was repre-
sented as if-then rules and facts, and inference engines used forward or
backward chaining to derive conclusions and answer queries. A key advan-
tage of this approach was transparency: the system could explain why a
conclusion was reached by exposing the chain of rule applications.
4


Logic programming, and in particular Prolog, became a natural foun-
dation for many expert systems. Prolog’s declarative semantics allow knowl-
edge to be expressed as Horn clauses, while its built-in inference mechanism
(backtracking search with unification) automatically derives consequences
from facts and rules. Classic work demonstrated Prolog’s suitability for ex-
pert systems, emphasizing:
• A clear separation between knowledge base (facts and rules) and infer-
ence engine.
• The ability to generate explanations and proof traces by inspecting
the search process.
• Compact, human-readable encodings of complex domain logic.
Although expert systems and Prolog fell out of mainstream attention dur-
ing the rise of statistical machine learning and deep learning, they remain
conceptually relevant for tasks where deterministic reasoning, auditabil-
ity, and formal guarantees are essential. Recent discussions on Prolog’s
role in modern AI highlight its enduring value as a symbolic backbone for
hybrid systems, especially when combined with neural components [8].
2.3
Neuro-Symbolic AI: Combining LLMs and Symbolic Rea-
soning
Neuro-symbolic AI seeks to integrate the strengths of neural models (pattern
recognition, language understanding) with symbolic methods (logical infer-
ence, structured knowledge). A common pattern is to use LLMs to parse
natural language and generate structured representations, which are then
processed by a symbolic engine to ensure correctness and explainability.
Recent work in this direction includes:
• Neuro-Symbolic Compliance frameworks that combine LLM-based
understanding with SMT-based reasoning to analyze financial regulations
in an interpretable and verifiable manner [9].
• Systems that extract policies from natural language using LLMs and en-
force them with symbolic engines, explicitly designing for fail-safe be-
havior when the extracted rules cannot fully discharge a decision.
• Approaches that compile rules into logical forms and use satisfiability or
constraint solvers to verify properties, often in multi-agent or domain-
specific configurations.
5


Within this landscape, Prolog-based neuro-symbolic systems have
gained renewed interest. Several lines of work explore:
• Training or prompting LLMs to emit Prolog code that is then executed
by an external solver, improving both answer accuracy and the reliability
of reasoning proofs [3].
• Using Prolog derivation logs to generate causal and human-readable
explanations, addressing the “black-box” nature of pure neural reasoning.
• Comparing adaptive neuro-symbolic systems with traditional, hard-coded
business rule engines, particularly in compliance-critical domains such as
finance and healthcare.
• Applying neuro-symbolic methods to enterprise systems (e.g., CRM, ERP)
where business logic must be both flexible and formally analyzable.
Prior work has approached LLM hallucination largely as a post-hoc
mitigation problem, using multi-agent review pipelines and dedicated scor-
ing metrics to detect and correct unsupported claims after generation [11].
More recent architectures combine agentic review with Nested Learning
and semantic caching to reduce hallucination while lowering computational
cost [10]. Euclid-MCP takes a complementary, architectural route: rather
than correcting fabrications after they occur, it removes the reasoning step
from the model entirely, delegating deduction to a deterministic engine.
2.4
Model Context Protocol (MCP)
The Model Context Protocol (MCP) is an emerging open standard for
connecting LLM applications to external tools, data sources, and services [5].
MCP defines a uniform interface through which LLM clients can:
• Discover available tools and resources (e.g., databases, APIs, reasoning
engines).
• Invoke tools with structured inputs and receive structured outputs.
• Compose multiple tools into complex workflows while maintaining a con-
sistent interaction model.
MCP has quickly attracted implementations from major organizations
and a growing ecosystem of community-maintained servers, ranging from
filesystem and code access to specialized data processors. However, until
6


recently, few MCP servers have exposed formal reasoning engines as first-
class components. Early efforts such as PrologMCP [12] demonstrate the
feasibility of exposing Prolog as an MCP tool, primarily targeting generic
logical reasoning tasks.
Euclid-MCP builds on the MCP abstraction but specializes it for policy
and rule modeling, offering:
• A domain-oriented logical description language tailored to business rules
and security constraints.
• Integrated translation to Prolog, safety checks, and error reporting.
• Tools explicitly designed for policy evaluation, diagnostic analysis,
scenario testing, and KB validation, rather than generic Prolog exe-
cution.
In doing so, Euclid-MCP contributes to the emerging class of MCP-
based neuro-symbolic systems, with a clear focus on overcoming the limita-
tions of semantic retrieval in rule-centric applications.
3
Euclid-MCP Architecture
This section describes the design of Euclid-MCP, from high-level architec-
ture to the Euclid-IR language, translation to Prolog, and MCP integra-
tion. The system is implemented as a Python-based MCP server that invokes
SWI-Prolog as a local reasoning backend and exposes a small, purpose-built
tool surface for policy and rule reasoning.
The use of SWI-Prolog in the current prototype is a tactical choice,
not an architectural dependency. Euclid-MCP is designed around an engine-
agnostic intermediate representation (Euclid-IR) that can be lowered
to Prolog or to alternative inference engines (e.g., Datalog engines, SMT
solvers, custom rule engines) without changing the user-facing APIs or the
MCP tool surface.
3.1
High-Level Architecture
Euclid-MCP follows a hybrid cognitive architecture in which an LLM
describes the world in terms of facts and rules, while a deterministic inference
engine performs the actual deduction. The main components are:
7


LLM client Any MCP-capable LLM application (e.g., an AI assistant, agent
framework, or custom tooling). The LLM is responsible for interpreting nat-
ural language inputs from users, generating structured descriptions of facts
and rules in Euclid-IR, invoking Euclid-MCP tools to evaluate queries
and inspect derivations, and rendering results and explanations back to the
user.
Euclid-MCP server A Python process implementing the MCP server in-
terface via FastMCP. It provides a Euclid-IR parser that validates and
normalizes facts, rules, and queries; an intermediate representation (Euclid-
IR) that is independent of any specific inference engine; a lowering layer that
compiles Euclid-IR into executable SWI-Prolog code; safety and sanitiza-
tion to restrict the set of allowed Prolog constructs; and a tool interface for
query evaluation, diagnostic analysis, scenario testing, and KB validation.
Inference backend In the current prototype, SWI-Prolog acts as the de-
terministic inference engine, invoked as an external process.
The server
translates Euclid-IR into a self-contained Prolog program, writes it to a
temporary file and executes it via swipl subprocess, parses structured JSON
output containing solutions and proof trees, and returns results to the MCP
client as typed data structures.
This separation of concerns ensures that the LLM never needs to perform
multi-step logical reasoning internally; it only needs to describe the problem
and interpret the results. All deduction is delegated to the inference backend,
which guarantees logical correctness with respect to the encoded rules and
facts.
3.2
Euclid-IR: An Engine-Agnostic Intermediate Represen-
tation
The core abstraction in Euclid-MCP is Euclid-IR, a declarative language
for logical inference designed to be:
• Readable — Syntax optimized for both humans and LLMs.
• Minimal — Only the essential constructs of Horn-clause logic.
• Deterministic — Every query has a finite, traceable proof.
• Backend-agnostic — Euclid-IR is an intermediate layer; today it tar-
gets Prolog, tomorrow it could target other engines.
8


A Euclid-IR knowledge base consists of:
• Facts – ground assertions about the world.
• Rules – implications of the form head IF body.
• Queries – goals to prove, prefixed with ?.
• Optional version directive (@version 1.0) and comments (# or //).
3.2.1
Core Constructs
Facts. Ground atoms that describe the current state of the world:
parent(tom, bob)
color(apple, red)
active(user_42)
rainy
Predicate names are lowercase identifiers; arguments are atoms, integers, or
variables. Zero-arity facts (e.g., rainy) are allowed.
Variables. Unknown or generic values, prefixed with $:
$x
$who
$user_name
Variables must start with $ followed by a lowercase letter; they are case-
sensitive and translated to Prolog variables (capitalized) during lowering.
Rules. Logical implications with a head and a body:
mortal($x) IF human($x)
ancestor($x, $y) IF parent($x, $y)
ancestor($x, $y) IF parent($x, $z) AND ancestor($z, $y)
The body is a conjunction of conditions connected by AND. Rules can span
multiple lines for readability, with continuation implied when a line ends in
IF or AND.
Negation. Closed-world negation using NOT:
blocked($user) IF NOT active($user)
eligible($user) IF registered($user) AND NOT blocked($user)
NOT p succeeds when p cannot be proven, corresponding to Prolog’s \+.
Queries. Goals to prove, prefixed with ?:
9


? mortal(socrates)
? ancestor(tom, $who)
? can_access($user, $res) AND resource($res, _, _, _, _, secret)
Queries may include variables (to find bindings) or be ground (boolean
checks). Conjunctions with AND are allowed.
Arithmetic. Numeric comparisons and evaluations in rule bodies:
stale($user) IF user($user) AND last_login($user, $days) AND $days >
90
adult($person) IF age($person, $age) AND $age >= 18
Supported operators include >, >=, <, =<, =:=, =\=, and is, which are passed
through to the backend (currently Prolog) and evaluated at deduction time.
Wildcards. The _ symbol represents an anonymous variable:
resource(apple, $color, _, _, _, _)
Comments. Two styles are supported:
# This is a comment
// This is also a comment
parent(tom, bob)
# inline comment
Version directive. An optional first line can declare the Euclid-IR
version:
@version 1.0
parent(tom, bob)
? parent($x, $y)
If omitted, version 1.0 is assumed. Future versions are intended to be back-
ward compatible.
3.2.2
Design Choices and Limitations
Euclid-IR targets Horn-clause logic — the core of Prolog without ad-
vanced features:
• Supported: facts, rules, negation (closed-world), arithmetic, multi-line
rules, conjunction queries, wildcards.
• Not supported: disjunction (OR), cut (!), list syntax, findall/bagof,
dynamic assert/retract, modules, strings (only atoms).
10


These limitations are intentional: they keep the language minimal, de-
terministic, and easy to lower to multiple backends. Workarounds exist for
common patterns (e.g., encoding disjunction as multiple rules, representing
lists via indexed facts).
Euclid-IR also supports a YAML format for structured input, though
the text format is recommended for conciseness and readability.
3.3
Translation to Prolog
The Prolog lowering layer converts Euclid-IR into executable SWI-Prolog
code. This process is fully automated and deterministic:
1. Mapping to Clauses. Each Euclid-IR fact is translated directly into
a Prolog fact. Each Euclid-IR rule is translated into a Prolog clause.
For example:
mortal(X) :- human(X).
ancestor(X, Y) :- parent(X, Z), ancestor(Z, Y).
Queries are encoded as top-level goals that can be invoked from the MCP
tools.
2. Variable Translation. Euclid-IR variables (e.g., $x, $who) are mapped
to Prolog variables by capitalizing the name (e.g., X, Who). This isolates
users and the LLM from Prolog’s syntactic idiosyncrasies (uppercase vari-
ables).
3. Keyword and Operator Mapping.
Euclid-IR keywords and op-
erators are translated to their Prolog equivalents: IF →:-, AND →,,
NOT →\+, ? →?-. Arithmetic operators (>, >=, etc.) are passed through
verbatim.
4. Safety and Sanitization. The translation layer enforces safety proper-
ties: a sanitizer validates that only allowed predicate constructors appear
in the input; potentially dangerous built-ins (e.g., file I/O, network ac-
cess) are excluded from the generated code; input size is capped (500 KB)
and execution is bounded by timeout (30 s by default).
This design ensures that the generated Prolog code is both auditable
(humans can read and verify the mapping) and safe (the LLM cannot arbi-
trarily execute system commands via Prolog). Future backends will follow
the same pattern: Euclid-IR →target language, with analogous safety
controls.
11


3.4
MCP Integration: Tools and Interaction Pattern
Euclid-MCP exposes its functionality through a small, well-defined set of
four MCP tools, following established MCP design patterns. Each tool is
a stateless function that accepts a knowledge base as input and returns a
typed result. The tools are:
reason Purpose: Main deduction — evaluate a knowledge base and return
solutions with proof trees.
Input: knowledge (Euclid-IR text or YAML), optional query override,
max_solutions (default 5), max_depth (default 30).
Output: A list of solutions, each containing variable bindings (substitutions)
and a proof tree with nodes of type fact, rule, or and.
Example: Given facts about parents and rules about ancestry, reason re-
turns all solutions for ancestor(tom, $who) with full derivation chains.
diagnose Purpose: Query analysis — understand why a query succeeds or
fails.
Input: knowledge, query, mode (one of why, why_not, what_needs), max_solutions,
max_depth.
Output: A DiagnosisResult with holds (boolean), findings[] (list of
issues detected), conclusion (human-readable summary), and optionally a
proof.
Modes: why — explain why a query holds (or that it doesn’t); why_not —
explain why a query fails (missing facts/rules); what_needs — suggest what
would make a false query true.
Example: diagnose(knowledge, "mortal(plato)", mode="why_not") re-
turns findings like “No facts or rules defined for ‘mortal” and suggests what
to add.
what_if Purpose: Scenario analysis — apply modifications to a knowledge
base and compare results before and after.
Input: base_knowledge, modifications (lines prefixed with + to add or -
to remove facts), query, max_solutions, max_depth.
Output: A WhatIfResult with before_count, after_count, delta, solutions_before,
solutions_after, and a conclusion describing the impact.
Example: what_if(base_kb, "+ human(plato)", "mortal($who)") shows
how adding a fact changes the number of solutions.
check_kb Purpose: Knowledge base validator — check for syntax errors,
undefined predicates, circular rules, and duplicates before running deduction.
12


Input: knowledge (Euclid-IR text or YAML).
Output: A KBCheckResult with valid (boolean), errors[], warnings[],
facts_count, rules_count, predicates_count.
Example: check_kb(knowledge) returns {valid:
true, errors:
[],
warnings:
[], facts_count:
2, rules_count:
1}.
These tools are designed to support a translate-run-inspect-repair
loop:
1. Validate: The LLM calls check_kb to verify the knowledge base is well-
formed before reasoning.
2. Translate: The LLM generates a Euclid-IR knowledge base (facts +
rules + query).
3. Run: The LLM invokes reason to obtain answers with proof trees.
4. Inspect: If the result is unexpected, the LLM calls diagnose to under-
stand why a query succeeds or fails.
5. Repair: Based on the diagnosis, the LLM may refine the knowledge base
(e.g., add missing rules, correct mis-encoded conditions) and re-run the
query.
6. Explore: The LLM uses what_if to test hypothetical modifications be-
fore applying them.
Errors from the inference backend (e.g., syntax errors, unsatisfiable queries)
are returned as readable text messages, consistent with MCP best prac-
tices, so the LLM can use them as feedback for self-correction.
3.5
Implementation Details
The current prototype of Euclid-MCP is implemented in Python and uses
SWI-Prolog as the reasoning backend. Key implementation choices include:
Prolog Integration The server invokes SWI-Prolog as an external sub-
process. For each reasoning call: the generated Prolog code is written to a
temporary .pl file; the swipl binary is invoked with subprocess.run() and
a configurable timeout (default 30 s); structured JSON output (solutions +
proof trees) is captured from stdout and parsed; the temporary file is cleaned
up after execution. This approach prioritizes simplicity and portability:
it requires no compiled extensions, no foreign language interfaces, and no
persistent Prolog process.
13


MCP Transport Euclid-MCP supports two transport modes: stdio —
the default MCP transport, used when the server is launched by a local client
(e.g., Claude Desktop, OpenCode, Cursor); HTTP API — a standalone
REST server (via integrations/euclid_api.py) exposing POST endpoints
at /reason, /diagnose, /what-if, /check-kb, plus a GET /health end-
point.
This mode is designed for integration with automation platforms
(n8n, Zapier, Make) and remote access.
Packaging and Distribution The server is distributed as a Python pack-
age via PyPI (pip install euclid-mcp) and can also be built as a Docker
image that bundles SWI-Prolog, eliminating the need for a local Prolog in-
stallation.
This implementation provides a practical, reusable foundation for inte-
grating deterministic logical reasoning into LLM-based applications, with
a particular focus on business rules and security policies. The presence of
Euclid-IR ensures that the system can evolve beyond Prolog as new infer-
ence backends become desirable or necessary.
4
Use Case: IT Security & Compliance
To demonstrate the practical applicability of Euclid-MCP, we developed a
realistic security compliance model for a cloud-based organization. This use
case illustrates how Euclid-IR can encode multi-layer policies, support di-
verse reasoning patterns, and enable explanation and counterfactual analysis
that are beyond the reach of semantic retrieval alone.
The full knowledge base, along with all queries and scenarios described
in this section, is available in the public repository at https://github.com/
meob/Euclid-MCP/tree/main/examples/07_it_security_compliance.
4.1
Scenario Description
The modeled organization operates a multi-team engineering and operations
structure in a cloud environment (AWS-flavored). Compliance requirements
are derived from:
• External benchmarks: CIS Amazon Web Services Foundations Bench-
mark, with controls covering account management, S3, CloudTrail, net-
working, GuardDuty, RDS, EC2, Lambda, and more.
14


• Internal policies:
IAM best practices, role hierarchies, environment
tiers, data classification, approval workflows, and incident response proce-
dures.
The knowledge base is organized into three conceptual layers:
1. Standards (Layer 1): CIS controls with severity levels (critical, high,
medium, low). IAM best-practice rules encoding risks such as separation-
of-duties violations, excessive permissions, stale access, privilege escala-
tion, root account violations, and service account risks.
2. Policies (Layer 2): Role hierarchy (intern →junior_dev →mid_senior_dev
→senior_dev →tech_lead →eng_manager →director →vp_engineering
→cto, plus operations, security, and product roles). Environment tiers
(production, golden, staging, development, sandbox) with associated de-
ployment level requirements, encryption/backup requirements, and audit
log requirements. Data classification (public, internal, confidential, se-
cret) and role clearance levels. Access control rules, critical operations,
approval workflows, MFA requirements, and incident-mode restrictions.
3. Data (Layer 3): 30 users (in the small version) with attributes such
as department, role(s), permissions, MFA status, last login time, account
type (human/service), console access, and access keys. 50 resources (EC2,
S3, RDS, KMS, Lambda, ECS, EKS, SNS, SQS, DynamoDB) with at-
tributes such as environment, encryption status, backup status, access
level (public/private), and data classification. CIS control applicability
facts linking specific resources to relevant CIS controls.
A larger variant of the same model (200 users, 300 resources, ∼3,872
facts) is used for performance evaluation and stress testing.
4.2
Representative Queries
We defined a set of 10 canonical queries covering a wide range of reasoning
patterns: single-hop permission checks, multi-hop policy reasoning, temporal
and threshold patterns, cross-policy violations, and resource audits. Below
we present four representative queries that illustrate the diversity of ques-
tions Euclid-MCP can answer.
4.2.1
Permission Check Through Role Hierarchy (Q1)
Question: “Can user_0005 manage servers?”
15


? user_has_permission(user_0005, manage_servers)
This query checks whether a specific user has a specific permission via the role
hierarchy. The user_has_permission/2 predicate is derived from the user’s
assigned role(s), and the role_has_permission/2 predicate, which accounts
for direct role permissions and inherited permissions via the inherits/2
relation.
Result: The query succeeds. The proof tree shows that user_0005 has
the sysadmin role, which directly grants manage_servers permission.
4.2.2
Multi-Hop Policy Reasoning:
Deployment to Production
(Q2)
Question: “Which roles can deploy code to production?”
? can_deploy($who, production)
The can_deploy/2 predicate encodes a composite policy: the user must have
the deploy_code permission; the user’s role level must meet or exceed the
requirement for the target environment (production requires level ≥6); the
role hierarchy and deploy_role_level/2 facts determine each role’s level.
Result: The query returns bindings for $who corresponding to users with
roles at level 6 or higher (e.g., director, vp_engineering, cto) who also have
deploy_code permission.
4.2.3
Cross-Policy Violation: Separation of Duties (Q6)
Question: “Which users violate separation of duties?”
? violates_separation_of_duties($who)
The violates_separation_of_duties/1 predicate encodes two conflict pat-
terns: having both deploy_code and approve_deploy permissions; having
both create_role and assign_role permissions.
Result: In the small KB, the query yields 2 users; in the larger KB, it
yields 11. For each violating user, diagnose can generate a human-readable
explanation listing the conflicting permissions and the rules that classify
them as a violation.
4.2.4
Resource Audit: Unencrypted Production Resources (Q7)
Question: “Which production resources are not encrypted?”
16


? resource($name, production, not_encrypted, _, _, _)
This query performs a simple pattern match over resource facts, filtering by
environment (production) and encryption status (not_encrypted).
Result: The query returns a list of resource names (e.g., specific EC2
instances, S3 buckets, RDS databases) that are in production but not en-
crypted. This directly supports CIS compliance audits (e.g., CIS 2.7 for RDS
encryption, CIS 7.1 for EC2).
4.3
Additional Query Patterns
The full query set includes several other patterns that further demonstrate
the expressivity of Euclid-IR:
• Clearance-based access (Q3): “Which users can access secret data?”
? can_access_resource($who, $res) AND resource($res, _, _, _, _,
secret)
This query joins user clearance levels with resource classification, enforcing
that user_max_clearance ≥resource_classification_level.
• Negative query (Q8): “Can an intern write code?”
? user_has_permission($who, write_code) AND has_role($who, intern)
Expected result: empty set, since interns only have read_code.
This
validates that the policy correctly restricts interns.
• Temporal / IAM hygiene (Q5, Q9): “Which users have stale access
(over 90 days)?”
? stale_access($who)
“Which users have excessive permissions (more than 15)?”
? excessive_permissions($who, $count)
These encode AWS IAM best-practice patterns for detecting stale creden-
tials and least-privilege violations.
17


Together, these queries cover single-hop, multi-hop, temporal, cross-
policy, threshold, and resource-audit reasoning patterns.
4.4
Explanations and Diagnostic Reasoning
Beyond answering queries, Euclid-MCP can explain why a conclusion holds
or fails. We defined three diagnostic questions to illustrate this capability.
4.4.1
Why Does a User Have a Permission? (Q11)
Question: “Why does eng_0008 have manage_servers permission?”
Using the diagnose tool with mode="why":
{"knowledge": "...",
"query": "user_has_permission(eng_0008, manage_servers)",
"mode": "why"}
Explanation: The system generates a proof tree showing that eng_0008 has
the sysadmin role, which has the manage_servers permission via role_permission(sysadmin,
manage_servers).
4.4.2
Why Does a User Lack a Permission? (Q12)
Question: “Why doesn’t eng_0002 (intern) have deploy_code permission?”
Using the diagnose tool with mode="why_not":
{"knowledge": "...",
"query": "user_has_permission(eng_0002, deploy_code)",
"mode": "why_not"}
Explanation: The system reports that eng_0002 has the intern role, which
only has read_code and run_tests permissions. There is no inheritance
path from intern to any role with deploy_code.
4.4.3
What Is Needed to Gain a Permission? (Q13)
Question: “What would eng_0002 need to deploy code?”
Using the diagnose tool with mode="what_needs":
{"knowledge": "...",
"query": "user_has_permission(eng_0002, deploy_code)",
"mode": "what_needs"}
18


Explanation: The system identifies missing conditions: eng_0002 would
need a role that has deploy_code permission (e.g., senior_dev, tech_lead,
or higher).
4.5
What-If Analysis and Counterfactuals
Euclid-MCP can also evaluate hypothetical changes to the knowledge base,
supporting impact analysis and policy design.
We defined three what-if
scenarios using the what_if tool:
4.5.1
Role Promotion (W1)
Question: “What if eng_0002 (intern) is promoted to senior_dev?”
{"base_knowledge": "...",
"modifications": "- has_role(eng_0002, intern)\n+ has_role(eng_0002
, senior_dev)",
"query": "user_has_permission(eng_0002, deploy_code)"}
Result: In the base configuration, the query fails (interns cannot deploy).
Under the modified configuration, the query succeeds, and the explanation
shows that senior_dev has deploy_code permission, which is inherited by
eng_0002.
4.5.2
Adding a Compliant Resource (W2)
Question: “What if a new encrypted production database is added?”
{"base_knowledge": "...",
"modifications": "+ resource(new_db, production, encrypted, db_team
, 2026-07-01, database)\n+ resource_type(new_db, database)",
"query": "resource($name, production, encrypted, _, _, _) AND
resource_type($name, database)"}
Result: The query succeeds under the modified configuration, confirming
that the new resource complies with encryption and environment require-
ments.
4.5.3
Role Addition (W3)
Question: “What if ops_0001 (helpdesk) gets the sysadmin role?”
{"base_knowledge": "...",
"modifications": "+ has_role(ops_0001, sysadmin)",
"query": "user_has_permission(ops_0001, manage_servers)"}
19


Result:
In the base configuration, ops_0001 (helpdesk) does not have
manage_servers.
Under the modified configuration, the query succeeds,
and the explanation shows the new permission path.
4.6
Discussion
This use case demonstrates several key points:
1. Expressivity: Euclid-IR can encode realistic, multi-layer security and
compliance policies, including role hierarchies, environment tiers, data
classification, approval workflows, and CIS control applicability.
2. Diverse reasoning patterns: The query set covers single-hop, multi-
hop, temporal, cross-policy, threshold, and resource-audit patterns, as
well as diagnostic and counterfactual reasoning.
3. Explainability: For each conclusion, Euclid-MCP can generate a proof
tree and render it in human-readable form, supporting audits, onboarding,
and policy design.
4. Determinism and auditability: Unlike semantic RAG, which can only
retrieve “similar” policies, Euclid-MCP provides deterministic, auditable
answers to questions such as “Is this user compliant?” or “Which resources
violate CIS controls?”
5. Scalability: The same model scales from a small KB (∼30 users, ∼50
resources) to a larger KB (∼200 users, ∼300 resources) without chang-
ing the policy rules, demonstrating that Euclid-IR can support realistic
organizational scales.
4.7
Summary of Queries
For reference, Table 1 summarizes all canonical queries, diagnostic questions,
and what-if scenarios.
5
Evaluation
We evaluate Euclid-MCP along two dimensions:
1. Qualitative expressivity: Can Euclid-IR encode realistic, multi-layer
policies and support diverse reasoning patterns (as demonstrated in Sec-
tion 4)?
20


Table 1: Summary of queries and scenarios in the IT security & compliance
use case.
ID
Type
Question
Pattern
Q1
Query
Can user_0005 manage servers?
Single-hop permission check
Q2
Query
Which roles can deploy code to production?
Multi-hop policy reasoning
Q3
Query
Which users can access secret data?
Clearance vs classification
Q4
Query
Can a tech_lead deploy to golden environment?
Multi-role deployment
Q5
Query
Which users have stale access (over 90 days)?
Temporal / IAM hygiene
Q6
Query
Which users violate separation of duties?
Cross-policy violation
Q7
Query
Which production resources are not encrypted?
Resource audit
Q8
Query
Can an intern write code?
Negative query (expected e
Q9
Query
Which users have excessive permissions (>15)?
Threshold / least privilege
Q10
Query
Which S3 buckets in production are not encrypted?
Combined filter
Q11
Diagnose
Why does eng_0008 have manage_servers permission?
Why-explanation
Q12
Diagnose
Why doesn’t eng_0002 (intern) have deploy_code permission?
Why-not explanation
Q13
Diagnose
What would eng_0002 need to deploy code?
What-needs analysis
W1
What-if
What if eng_0002 (intern) is promoted to senior_dev?
Role promotion
W2
What-if
What if a new encrypted production database is added?
Resource addition
W3
What-if
What if ops_0001 (helpdesk) gets the sysadmin role?
Role addition
2. Quantitative performance and accuracy: How does the system scale
with knowledge base size, and how does it compare to LLM-only reasoning
on logical tasks?
The evaluation focuses on the IT security & compliance use case from
Section 4, using both the small (∼30 users, ∼50 resources, ∼578 facts) and
large (∼200 users, ∼300 resources, ∼3,872 facts) knowledge bases, plus a
synthetic RBAC benchmark at 1,000 users.
5.1
Expressivity
The security compliance model demonstrates that Euclid-IR can encode:
• Multi-layer policies: External standards (CIS controls), internal poli-
cies (role hierarchies, environment tiers, data classification), and concrete
data (users, resources, configurations).
• Diverse reasoning patterns: Single-hop permission checks, multi-hop
policy reasoning, temporal patterns (stale access), threshold patterns (ex-
cessive permissions), cross-policy violations (separation of duties), and re-
source audits (unencrypted production resources).
21


• Diagnostic and counterfactual reasoning: Why/why-not explana-
tions, what-needs analysis, and what-if scenarios for role engineering and
infrastructure planning.
These capabilities go well beyond what semantic RAG can provide. While
RAG can retrieve “similar” policies or past incidents, it cannot deterministi-
cally derive whether a user violates separation of duties, which resources fail
CIS controls, or what would change if a role were modified.
5.2
Reasoning Benchmarks
To quantify the benefits of Euclid-MCP over LLM-only reasoning, we con-
ducted two benchmarks comparing:
• A: llama3.1:8b (small local LLM).
• B: qwen3-coder:480b-cloud (large cloud LLM).
• C: llama3.1:8b + Euclid-MCP (small LLM augmented with determinis-
tic inference).
5.2.1
Small-Scale Reasoning Benchmark
Task:
5 logical reasoning tasks (genealogy, taxonomy, RBAC) with 5–
15 facts each. Goal: Assess whether LLMs alone can handle small, self-
contained logical problems.
Table 2: Small-scale reasoning benchmark results.
Q
Task
GT
A (8B)
B (480B)
C (8B+Euclid)
Q1
Genealogy (deep chain)
Yes
✓
✓
✓
Q2
Taxonomy (property inheritance)
Yes
✓
✓
✓
Q3
Taxonomy (negative inference)
No
✓
✓
✓
Q4
RBAC (permission inheritance)
Yes
✓
✓
✓
Q5
RBAC (negative)
No
✓
✓
✓
Accuracy
5/5
5/5
5/5
Avg time
4 772 ms
2 180 ms
2 542 ms
Avg tokens (in / out)
131 / 118
130 / 133
254 / 46
Conclusion: With small KBs (5–50 facts), all three conditions achieve
equivalent accuracy. Euclid-MCP matches LLM accuracy, but at slightly
higher input tokens (254 vs. 131) due to the Euclid-IR encoding. Execution
time is comparable (2.5 s vs. 4.8 s / 2.2 s).
22


5.2.2
Large-Scale RBAC Benchmark
Task: 1,000 synthetic users, 7 roles with hierarchy, 17 base permissions, 20
direct grants — 1,053 facts total. Goal: Assess performance at a scale where
LLM working memory fails.
Table 3: Large-scale RBAC benchmark results.
Q
Task
GT
A (8B)
B (480B)
C (8B+Euclid)
Q1
Count users with delete_repo
31
× 1
× 1
✓31
Q2
Can user_0142 push_code?
Yes
✓
✓
✓
Q3
Count users with deploy
103
× 100
× 901
✓103
Q4
Can user_0834 read_logs?
Yes
× No
✓
✓
Q5
Can user_0222 manage_billing? (direct)
Yes
✓
× No
✓
Accuracy
2/5
2/5
5/5
Avg time
6 966 ms
3 695 ms
963 ms
Avg tokens (in / out)
386 / 165
435 / 212
421 / 12
Conclusion: At scale (1,000+ facts), LLMs alone hallucinate systemati-
cally — both 8B and 480B cloud give wrong counts and miss explicit facts.
Euclid-MCP delivers exact answers every time, while being faster (963 ms
vs. 6,966 ms) and more token-efficient (12 vs. 165 output tokens) because
the LLM generates only a simple query instead of fallacious reasoning.
5.3
Summary of Benchmark Findings
Table 4: Benchmark summary.
KB size
LLM alone
LLM + Euclid-MCP
Small (5–50 facts)
✓Sufficient accuracy
△Comparable accuracy, higher input tokens
Large (1,000+ facts)
× Hallucinates systematically
✓Exact deduction, faster, more token-efficient
Key takeaway: Euclid-MCP proves its value at scale. When facts fit in an
LLM’s context window and the reasoning chain is shallow, the overhead of a
deterministic engine is rarely justified. When the KB exceeds a few hundred
facts — or when exact counting, intersection, or multi-hop inheritance is
required — Euclid-MCP delivers exact answers while LLMs of any size
hallucinate systematically.
23


5.4
Comparison with Semantic RAG
To contextualize these results, consider the typical workflow for answering a
compliance question using semantic RAG:
1. Retrieve relevant policy documents or past incidents based on the query.
2. Read the retrieved documents and attempt to infer the answer.
3. Guess or approximate the conclusion, often with significant uncertainty.
In contrast, Euclid-MCP:
1. Encodes policies as formal rules in Euclid-IR.
2. Derives answers deterministically using logical inference.
3. Explains the derivation with proof trees.
Table 5: Comparison: Semantic RAG vs. Euclid-MCP.
Aspect
Semantic RAG
Euclid-MCP
Reasoning
Approximate, based on similar-
ity
Deterministic, based on formal
rules
Auditability
Low
(retrieved
snippets,
no
proofs)
High (proof trees,
rule refer-
ences)
Policy enforcement
Not possible (retrieval only)
Direct (rules encode enforcement
logic)
Counterfactuals
Not supported
Supported (what-if scenarios)
Accuracy at scale
Degrades with KB size
Exact, independent of KB size
Latency
Depends on retrieval + LLM in-
ference
Typically <1 s for tested queries
This comparison underscores that Euclid-MCP is not a replacement for
RAG, but rather a complementary tool for scenarios requiring deterministic
reasoning and auditability.
5.5
Limitations
While the evaluation demonstrates strong expressivity and accuracy, several
limitations should be noted:
24


1. Horn-clause restriction: Euclid-IR does not support disjunction, cut,
list pattern matching, or advanced Prolog features. This limits expres-
sivity for certain problem domains (e.g., complex data structures, non-
monotonic reasoning beyond negation as failure).
2. Scalability beyond 10K facts: While the system performs well for
KBs up to ∼4,000 facts, larger KBs (e.g., 100,000+ facts) may require
optimization (e.g., indexing, tabling, or migration to a Datalog engine).
3. Backend dependency: The current prototype relies on SWI-Prolog.
While Euclid-IR is designed to be backend-agnostic, alternative back-
ends (e.g., Datalog, SMT) have not yet been implemented or evaluated.
4. Integration overhead: Integrating Euclid-MCP into an LLM-based
application requires additional tooling (e.g., Euclid-IR generation, er-
ror handling, explanation rendering), which may increase development
complexity compared to pure RAG.
5.6
Summary
The evaluation demonstrates that Euclid-MCP:
• Expresses realistic, multi-layer policies in Euclid-IR.
• Supports diverse reasoning patterns, including diagnostic and counter-
factual analysis.
• Delivers exact answers at scale, where LLMs alone hallucinate system-
atically.
• Performs well for interactive use, with median query latencies under 1 s
for KBs up to ∼1,000 facts.
• Complements semantic RAG by providing deterministic, auditable rea-
soning for policy enforcement and compliance scenarios.
Future work will explore alternative backends (e.g., Datalog, SMT) to
improve scalability and expressivity, as well as integration patterns for pro-
duction LLM-based applications.
6
Conclusion
This paper presented Euclid-MCP, a system that augments large language
models with deterministic logical reasoning capabilities via the Model Con-
25


text Protocol. By introducing Euclid-IR— an engine-agnostic intermedi-
ate representation for Horn-clause logic — Euclid-MCP enables LLMs to
encode, evaluate, and explain complex policies and rules without requiring
expertise in logic programming or Prolog syntax.
The evaluation demonstrates three key findings:
1. Expressivity: Euclid-IR can encode realistic, multi-layer security and
compliance policies, including role hierarchies, environment tiers, data
classification, approval workflows, and CIS control applicability. The sys-
tem supports diverse reasoning patterns (single-hop, multi-hop, temporal,
cross-policy, threshold, and resource-audit queries) as well as diagnostic
and counterfactual analysis.
2. Accuracy at scale: On small knowledge bases (5–50 facts), LLMs alone
achieve comparable accuracy to Euclid-MCP. However, at scale (1,000+
facts), LLMs of any size — from 8B local models to 480B cloud models
— hallucinate systematically on counting, intersection, and inheritance
queries. Euclid-MCP delivers exact answers in all cases, while also being
faster and more token-efficient.
3. Explainability and auditability: For every conclusion, Euclid-MCP
can generate a proof tree and render it in human-readable form. This
supports audits, onboarding, role engineering, and policy design — capa-
bilities that are absent from semantic RAG and pure LLM-based reason-
ing.
The central thesis of this work is that semantic RAG is the wrong
tool for rule enforcement. RAG excels at retrieving relevant documents,
but it cannot deterministically derive whether a user violates separation of
duties, which resources fail compliance controls, or what would change if a
policy were modified. Euclid-MCP fills this gap by providing a determin-
istic inference layer that complements RAG and LLM reasoning.
Practical Implications
For practitioners building LLM-based applications, the implications are clear:
• Use RAG for open-ended queries, document retrieval, and knowledge
exploration.
• Use Euclid-MCP (or similar deterministic reasoning tools) for policy en-
forcement, compliance checking, access review, and any scenario requiring
exact, auditable answers.
26


• Combine both: Use RAG to retrieve relevant policies, then use Euclid-
MCP to evaluate whether a specific configuration or action complies with
those policies.
This hybrid approach leverages the strengths of both paradigms: the flex-
ibility and breadth of semantic retrieval, and the precision and auditability
of logical inference.
Euclid-MCP as a Stable Reasoning Substrate for Agents
An emerging trend for complex tasks is to use LLM agents that generate
and execute programs: they collect information, write code, orchestrate
tools, and finally return a result. This mitigates hallucination for procedural
tasks, but it introduces a different problem for compliance and policy
reasoning:
• Each new compliance question can lead to new agents and new gener-
ated programs.
• Different agents may encode slightly different interpretations of the
same policy.
• Over time, the organization accumulates inconsistent, ad-hoc policy
implementations that are hard to audit, compare, or evolve.
Euclid-MCP addresses this by externalizing rule knowledge into a
single, canonical representation (Euclid-IR) that is:
• Shared: All agents and tools query the same policy definitions.
• Stable: Policies change only when the Euclid-IR knowledge base is up-
dated, not when a new agent is deployed.
• Auditable: Every decision can be traced back to specific rules and facts,
regardless of which agent initiated the query.
• Reusable: The same knowledge base supports access review, deployment
approval, incident response, and compliance reporting without re-encoding
logic.
In this view, Euclid-MCP is not an alternative to agents; it is a shared
policy engine that agents (and RAG systems) call via MCP when they
need deterministic answers to rule-based questions.
27


Broader Impact
Euclid-MCP represents a step toward hybrid cognitive architectures
that combine the generality of LLMs with the precision of symbolic reason-
ing. By exposing logical reasoning as an MCP tool, we lower the barrier to
entry for developers who want to integrate deterministic inference into their
applications without becoming logic programming experts.
The design of Euclid-IR— human-readable, backend-agnostic, and easy
to translate into multiple target languages — ensures that the system can
evolve beyond Prolog as new inference engines become available. This po-
sitions Euclid-MCP as a flexible foundation for future research on hybrid
reasoning systems.
Final Thoughts
The results of this evaluation support a simple conclusion: when facts fit in
an LLM’s context window and the reasoning chain is shallow, LLMs
alone are sufficient. When they don’t — above a few hundred facts
— deterministic reasoning is essential.
Euclid-MCP proves its value at scale, delivering exact answers while
LLMs of any size hallucinate systematically. By bridging the gap between
natural language and formal logic, Euclid-MCP enables a new class of LLM-
based applications that are not only fluent and flexible, but also precise,
auditable, and trustworthy.
Availability: The Euclid-MCP implementation, Euclid-IR specification,
and all benchmarks described in this paper are available at https://github.
com/meob/Euclid-MCP.
References
[1] meob. Euclid-MCP: MCP Server for Logical Reasoning — Turns Facts
into Formal Proofs. https://github.com/meob/Euclid-MCP, 2025. Ac-
cessed: 2025-07-22.
[2] Lauren Nicole DeLong, Ramon Fernández Mir, and Jacques D. Fleuriot.
Neurosymbolic AI for Reasoning over Knowledge Graphs: A Survey.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3420218.
28


[3] Sen Yang, Xin Li, Leyang Cui, Lidong Bing, and Wai Lam. Neuro-
Symbolic Integration Brings Causal and Reliable Reasoning Proofs. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL
2025, 2025.
[4] Sanskar Sehgal and Yanhong A. Liu. Logical Lease Litigation: Prolog
and LLMs for Rental Law Compliance in New York. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Logic Programming (ICLP 2024),
volume 416 of EPTCS, pages 59–68, 2025. https://doi.org/10.4204/
EPTCS.416.4.
[5] Model Context Protocol Contributors.
Model Context Protocol
Servers. https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/servers, 2025.
Accessed: 2025-07-22.
[6] Jan Wielemaker and others. SWI-Prolog: A Modern Prolog System.
https://www.swi-prolog.org/, 2025. Accessed: 2025-07-22.
[7] Zenodo Community. Knowledge Graphs as Grounded World Models for
Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence. https://zenodo.org/records/
18880228, 2025. Accessed: 2025-07-22.
[8] Adam
Rybiński.
Prolog
MCP
Server:
Neurosymbolic
AI
for
Modern
Workflows.
https://dev.to/adamrybinski/
prolog-mcp-server-neurosymbolic-ai-for-modern-workflows-3e35,
2025. Accessed: 2025-07-22.
[9] Yung-Shen Hsia, Fang Yu, and Jie-Hong Roland Jiang. Neuro-Symbolic
Compliance: Integrating LLMs and SMT Solvers for Automated Finan-
cial Legal Analysis. Proceedings of the 2nd ACM AIware Conference,
2026.
[10] Davide Gosmar and Deborah A. Dahl. Hallucination Mitigation with
Agentic AI, Nested Learning, and AI Sustainability via Semantic
Caching. arXiv preprint, 2026.
[11] Davide Gosmar and Deborah A. Dahl. Hallucination Mitigation using
Agentic AI Natural Language-Based Frameworks. arXiv preprint, 2025.
Introduces the Total Hallucination Score (THS) KPIs.
[12] Agnieszka Mensfelt, Adarsh Prabhakaran, Adrian Haret, Vince Trenc-
senyi, and Kostas Stathis. PrologMCP: A Standardized Prolog Tool
Interface for LLM Agents.
arXiv preprint, 2026.
Accepted at Joint
29


Workshop on Statistics and Knowledge Integration for Logic, Learning,
Ethical Decisions, and LLMs, 18 July 2026, Lisbon.
30
