Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor
against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
JANGGUN LEE, KAIST, Republic of Korea
JEEHOON KANG, FuriosaAI, Republic of Korea
Out-of-order multiprocessor is a critical piece of modern hardware, and their verification must solve the
following challenges. First, inter-core interleaving, in which the order their reads and writes reach shared
memory is unrestricted. Second, intra-core out-of-order execution, in which instructions fire out of program
order. The combination of the two yields weak outcomes, which no sequential execution explains, and modern
ISA allows such behaviors to account for them. However, the microarchitecture even exhibits excess out-of-order
executions, temporarily entering states forbidden by the ISA. While discarded later, such states complicate
reasoning about the core in full-system verification. Prior works verify a range of processor designs, while
none have performed unbounded verification for out-of-order multiprocessor exhibiting such weak outcomes.
We present the first formal verification of an out-of-order multiprocessor against an in-order, weak-memory
ISA. Our key idea is a well-designed core specification, which captures the essence of excess executions in
a single list of instructions. Building upon this, we decompose the proof into two steps. The first is a core
refinement, proving a core implementation against this specification, abstracting away every microarchitectural
state except those necessary to reason about excess executions and the core interface. The second is a system
inclusion, serializing the out-of-order memory executions and inter-core interleaving into the ISA, easily
removing excess executions thanks to the core specification. All of our proofs are mechanized in Rocq, heavily
utilizing large language model (LLM) agents to write proofs automatically.
1
Introduction
One of the most fundamental components of modern systems, multicore processors are difficult to
design and reason about due to weak behaviors which no sequentially consistent execution explains.
Such behaviors arise due to two aspects. First, the cores are subject to inter-core interleaving, as
the order in which their reads and writes reach the shared memory is unrestricted. Interleaving
alone yields only sequential consistency (SC), where every outcome is explained by some in-order
execution of the cores. Second, each core performs various optimizations, notably intra-core out-of-
order execution, firing independent instructions out of program order, e.g., a later load ahead of an
earlier one whose address is not yet ready. Adding out-of-order execution produces observable
beahviors in which no sequentially consistent execution explains.
To capture such weak behaviors, modern specifications for instruction set architectures (ISAs)
and programming languages employ a weak memory model. A rich literature simplifies and improves
the design of such weak memory models [2, 10, 17, 23, 24, 27].
Verification of processors. Existing works on weak-memory semantics, however, assume that a
processor implements its ISA semantics rather than proving it. Proving that processors implement
the ISA is important as (1) they are complex, so a violation is likely; and (2) a violation is costly,
since an in-production processor is difficult to update, unlike patchable software.
Prior works verify a range of processor designs, but none covers a design that (1) comprises
multiple cores; (2) performs intra-core out-of-order execution; (3) and enjoys theorems covering
arbitrary traces and design parameters (Table 1). Criteria (1) and (2) are essential when proving a
design against a weak-memory ISA, as only their combination yields weak outcomes, and (3) is
essential for full correctness.
Authors’ Contact Information: Janggun Lee, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea, janggun.lee@kaist.ac.kr; Jeehoon Kang,
FuriosaAI, Seoul, Republic of Korea, jeehoon.kang@furiosa.ai.
arXiv:2607.18727v1  [cs.PL]  21 Jul 2026


2
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
Table 1. Coverage of the key aspects of out-of-order multiprocessor verification across closely related case
studies. ✓= covered, ✗= not covered; unbounded means correctness for arbitrary traces and design parameters
such as buffer size.
Multicore
Out-of-order
Unbounded
Reid et al. [26]
✓
✓
✗
Choi et al. [8]
✓
✗
✓
Bourgeat et al. [3]
✗
✗
✓
Choi et al. [7]
✗
✗
✓
Ours
✓
✓
✓
Reid et al. [26] presented the verification flow done at Arm, which applies bounded model
checking to processor designs. It scales to an out-of-order multiprocessor and reasons against
an ISA with a weak memory model. As with bounded model checking in general, it targets only
fixed-size designs and bounded execution traces, and does not give full correctness theorems.
Choi et al. [8] presented Kami, a Rocq framework for designing and verifying hardware in the
style of the Bluespec [20] hardware description language. A Bluespec module comprises internal
state and atomic rules that execute one at a time (“one-rule-at-a-time” semantics). Kami leverages
this semantics to prove hardware modules one rule at a time. They modularly designed and proved
a pipelined multicore system, including its cache, against SC, with unbounded theorems covering
arbitrary traces and design parameters. However, their cores are in-order and exhibit no weak
outcomes.
Bourgeat et al. [3] presented Fjfj, another Bluespec-inspired language and verification framework.
Fjfj further simplifies Kami’s semantics through the restriction that a rule calls at most one update
method of each submodule. Under this semantics, Fjfj enables proving hardware modules on a
per-method and per-rule basis. They modularly designed and proved a pipelined single-core system
with an arbitrary number of in-flight instructions. However, their design targets SC and is an
in-order single core.
Choi et al. [7] presented a verification framework for the Verilog hardware description language.
They redefine Verilog semantics with least fixpoints, and prove the new semantics equivalent
to the standard scheduling semantics for synthesizable designs. On top of this semantics, they
verify functional correctness and liveness of a pipelined RISC-V processor, again with unbounded
theorems. However, their processor consists of a single in-order core, and they do not connect it to
any form of memory.
1.1
The Challenge: Excess Out-of-Order Execution
The main challenge of out-of-order multiprocessor proofs is to tame hardware’s excess out-of-order
execution, which reorders instructions where the ISA does not. In particular, microarchitecture may
compute outcomes the ISA forbids, only discarding them at a later time.
Excess by incoherent out-of-order loads. Figure 1 exhibits excess execution induced by out-of-
order loads. Here x and y are shared memory locations, both initially 0, and a0 and a1 are registers.
The writer stores 1 to x and then to y, while the reader loads y into a0 and then x into a1. For
simplicity, assuming that the two stores to x and y happened in-order, we analyze possible outcomes
of the loads.
We consider the distinct-address case where x ≠y and same-address case where x = y. The ISA
allows the outcome a0 = 1, a1 = 0 in the distinct-address variant. Since the read to 𝑦resulted in 1,
it must have executed after the two stores have finished. As distinct addresses have no coherence


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
3
Writer (core 0)
Reader (core 1)
sd t0, 0(s0)
# x := 1
ld a0, 0(s1)
# a0 = y
sd t1, 0(s1)
# y := 1
ld a1, 0(s0)
# a1 = x
Variant
Loads target
a0 = 1, a1 = 0
distinct addresses
x ≠y
✓allowed
same address
x = y
✗forbidden (coherence)
Fig. 1. Out-of-order execution of two loads. In both variants, the hardware may fire the second load before
the first, transiently obtaining a0 = 1, a1 = 0; only the distinct-address variant may retire it.
relation, the second load may read the stale initial value of x, just as if the two loads had executed in
reverse order. The ISA forbids that outcome in the same-address variant, since coherence requires a
later load to observe an equal-or-newer value than an earlier one.
The hardware, however, may execute the two loads out of order in both variants. If the address
calculation of the first load stalls, the second load fires first and reads the stale value 0 into a1, so
a0 = 1, a1 = 0 may arise in transient microarchitectural state. In the distinct-address variant, the
core may retire both loads, realizing the allowed outcome. In the same-address variant, the core
must detect the coherence violation and squash the offending load before it retires, so that the
forbidden outcome is never architecturally observable.
Excess by branch misspeculation. Another source of excess execution is instructions executed
beyond a branch misspeculation. Branch speculation is one of the most important optimizations, in
which the processor fetches instructions beyond a branch instruction by predicting the execution
result. If the prediction was incorrect, the core must detect it and squash succeeding instructions
before they retire.
1.2
Contributions
We present the first formal verification of an out-of-order multiprocessor against an
in-order, weak-memory ISA, unbounded in execution length and design parameters.
Specifically, we prove the following theorem:
Theorem 1 (Out-of-order multiprocessor correctness). 𝑛· Core𝑖+ ShMem ⊆ISA.
The theorem reads: the composition of 𝑛core implementations Core𝑖, along with a shared memory
specification ShMem, behaviorally refines (⊆) the instruction set architecture ISA. Here, we take
the register file of each core as external behavior. Core𝑖is our single-issue, out-of-order RISC-V
core with LR/SC atomics, written as Bluespec-style modules in Fjfj. ShMem is a primitive module
specifying the coherent shared memory, which we axiomatize. ISA is our instruction-set architecture,
for which we take promising semantics of Pulte et al. [24]1 proven equivalent to the axiomatic
RISC-V memory model. We modularly prove Theorem 1 utilizing various module refinements (⊑)
as follows.
The refinement decomposition through Core𝑠(§3). Our central contribution is a decomposition
of Theorem 1 that tames the hardware’s out-of-order execution in two steps, pivoting on a core
specification Core𝑠. The main goal of Core𝑠is to have a simple reasoning principle on resolving
1We replace Pulte et al. [24]’s tree-structured syntax with a list of bytes and a program counter closer to a real ISA, but
leave the memory semantics unchanged.


4
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
excess executions. Core𝑠achieves this by merging all instruction information into a single program-
order list. With this design, an excess behavior can be resolved simply by dropping all instructions
after the violating instruction. Another key aspect is that the positions of each instruction serves
as a unique identifier for it, which enables simple coherence calculations to detect loads to squash.
Utilizing this, the core refinement Core𝑖⊑Core𝑠eliminates every microarchitectural component
except the memory-interface bookkeeping. The system inclusion 𝑛· Core𝑠+ ShMem ⊆ISA then
re-serializes what remains, the observable memory reordering and the inter-core interleaving.
Modular proofs of the two steps (§4). We prove both steps by further decomposition, in a transitive
and compositional way. Specifically, we prove the core refinement per component and the system
inclusion by chaining intermediate specifications. Refining each of the components of Core𝑖into a
clean specification first enables the core refinement proof to use such specs for clean invariants.
Refinement with preconditions (§5). In a design as complex as an out-of-order processor, many in-
terface methods assume they are called with inputs satisfying some precondition. Typical refinement
frameworks, however, are unconditional, requiring an implementation to match its specification
for every input. Recently, conditional contextual refinement (CCR) and its successors [15, 29, 30]
implemented refinement with preconditions through wrappers, which embed separation logic
pre/postconditions into the operational semantics. Instead of reimplementing the complex design of
CCR, we develop a lightweight technique limited to pure predicates, which encodes preconditions
into existing module specifications rather than semantics. While restrictive, the encoding leaves the
framework untouched, reuses the existing metatheory, and suffices for every module specification
of §4.
Proof mechanization (§6). We mechanize the end-to-end refinement in Rocq and evaluate the
proof effort, with large language model (LLM) agents as the proof workhorse. The human authors
designed the initial specifications, invariants, and abstractions above, while the agents wrote
the large majority of the mechanized proofs. The agents completed the system inclusion nearly
autonomously, consulting us only when one was unprovable or a proof attempt grew outsized.
2
Background
We review the out-of-order multiprocessor (§2.1), the promising semantics it implements (§2.2),
and our proof method, modular refinement (§2.3).
2.1
Design of the Out-of-order Multiprocessor
Our multiprocessor design consists of a single-issue, out-of-order RISC-V core implementing RV32I
with the LR/SC atomic instructions, inspired by RiscyOO [34], and its connection to an abstract
shared memory specification ShMem. We implement the core in the style of Bluespec [20], so a
module consists of submodules, rules that update the submodule state, and methods that interact
with the outside world. For simplicity, we assume the instruction memory stays constant, so we
do not have a separate module for it. The design exhibits load–load, store–load, and store–store
reordering.2 The first two are induced by out-of-order issue of loads, and the last is induced by the
store buffer’s freedom to request pending addresses in any order.
Figure 2 shows the design of the core. Blue rectangles indicate submodules, while orange round-
edged boxes indicate internal rules or external methods. We describe the core’s interface, sketch
2Notably, it does not exhibit load–store reordering, which is explicitly documented as being preserved in RiscyOO. Many
modern cores do not exhibit load–store reordering as it has minimal performance benefits and complicates recovery logic.
See Lee et al. [16] for details.


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
5
Fig. 2. Design of the out-of-order core. Instructions flow PC
→fetch/decode →the arithmetic and memory units.
Fig. 3. Specification for shared memory,
single-core case for simplicity
how an instruction traverses the core, describe each component, and compose the cores into the
full system.
Interface. A single core has seven methods. The GetRf method obtains the core’s register file,
serving as its external behavior all the way to the ISA. Six memory methods form three request–
response pairs, one each for load, store, and atomic operations. Each requests a memory operation
to shared memory, waiting for a response to arrive later.
Instruction lifecycle. An instruction dispatches out of order between fetch and retire, which both
proceed in program order. We follow the reader of Fig. 1 as it loads y and then x. The core fetches
each load from the instruction memory at the program counter, decodes it, and allocates it an
entry in the reorder buffer (ROB). It then reads the load’s source operands, a value or a reference,
and places it into the memory unit’s reservation station (RS), which holds it until the operands are
ready and then dispatches it for execution. If the first load’s address is not ready, the second load
dispatches first, realizing the out-of-order execution of Fig. 1. During execution, the load carries an
issue state, recording whether it has issued to memory and received its response. The ROB retires
the two loads in program order at retire. The core squashes speculatively executed instructions on
a misprediction and flushes the pipeline on a load-coherence violation.
Reorder buffer and register file. The ROB holds every in-flight instruction in program order, from
allocation at decode to retirement at retire, and serves as the core’s dependency and speculation
tracker. The register file (RF) keeps the committed architectural state. The ROB resolves each source
operand to one of three forms: (1) a value from the register file, if no in-flight instruction produces
the register; (2) a value from the producing in-flight instruction, if it has finished executing in
the ROB; (3) a reference to the producing in-flight instruction, if it is still executing in the ROB.
The core tracks dependencies through ROB indices, which identify each in-flight instruction. The
ROB additionally tags every in-flight instruction with a speculation mask, which is a bitmask that
records which unresolved branches precede it. Tracking speculation inside the ROB is specific to
our design (§4.2), as it gives an overall cleaner specification. Instructions retire from the ROB’s
head, writing their register results to the register file.


6
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
Arithmetic unit. The arithmetic logic unit (ALU) executes pure instructions, arithmetic and
branches, out of program order. It selects any reservation-station entry whose operands are ready,
computes the result, and broadcasts it to dependent instructions, all in a pipelined manner. For a
branch, the ALU computes the actual direction, trains the branch predictor, and compares it against
the prediction made during decode. On a correct prediction, the core clears the branch from every
younger instruction’s speculation mask. On a misprediction, the core squashes those instructions
and redirects the fetch.
Memory unit. The memory unit (MemUnit) issues loads speculatively and delays stores until
after retire, using a program-order load–store queue (LSQ), a RS, and a store buffer (StB). Similar
to ALU, entries are marked as ready to request in an out-of-order manner. A load either issues to
memory or takes a forwarded value from an older in-flight store to the same address, either from
the load–store queue or the store buffer. Loads can issue if there are no older instructions to the
same address, which is the source of load–load and store–load reorderings. A store withholds its
write until it retires, then moves into the StB and drains to memory. StB drains stores to distinct
addresses in no fixed order, making it the source of store–store reordering. Atomic instructions are
non-speculative and take effect only at the retire point. An acquire fence blocks later loads from
issuing, while a release fence stalls until StB is drained.
Branch predictor. The branch predictor supplies a predicted direction at fetch, letting the core
speculate past an unresolved branch and keep fetching. The ALU trains the predictor whenever a
branch’s result is computed.
Squashing excess loads. The most important role of the LSQ is detecting excess loads and marking
them as to-be squashed. We illustrate the mechanism using the example of Fig. 1 in the same-
address case. At the start, the two loads will be placed inside the LSQ in program order. Suppose the
second load to x has received its response, and the first load’s address calculation has just finished.
We scan later instructions in the LSQ, and as the second load violates coherence we mark it as
to-be-squashed. The load is squashed at a later time, after it dequeues from the LSQ and moves
to the head of the ROB. When such a load is detected, the ROB flags the core to flush the entire
pipeline.
Squashing mispredicted branches. Mispredicted branches are eagerly squashed. If a misspec-
ulation is detected after execution, the core records the speculation tag of the branch, and then
squashes all instructions with a speculation mask containing the tag.
The multicore system. The full system comprises multiple cores Core𝑖, each connected to the
coherent ShMem. Fig. 3 shows the specification of ShMem. Its methods also consists of request-
response interface, which are connected to the respective counterparts of each core. The internal
states consist of memory and bookkeeping states for pending memory requests. 𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔, 𝑠𝑏𝑎𝑔, and
𝑎𝑒𝑥𝑡store pending loads, stores, and atomic requests, respectively. The system also exposes the
per-core GetRf method of each core as external observable state, and internally serves pending
requests in a nondeterministic order.
2.2
Promising Semantics
The promising semantics [14, 24] is an operational specification of a weak-memory ISA, in which
each thread executes one instruction at a time in program order. It abstracts the out-of-order
execution shown in §2.1, recovering the core’s out-of-order loads through a multi-valued memory,
a growing, append-only pool of timestamped messages, and out-of-order stores through promises,
writes performed ahead of program order.


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
7
(a) The views of core 1 for different address case.
(b) The views of core 1 for same address case.
Fig. 4. The promising semantics on the load–load example, showing the pool of messages and the reader’s
coherence view for the distinct-address (top) and same-address (bottom) variants.
Figure 4 replays the load–load example of Fig. 1 under the promising semantics. The writer’s
two stores append messages to the pool, each consisting of the address, value, and identifier for
the writing core. <x:=1>@1 records the write to x at timestamp 1 and <y:=1>@2 the write to y at
timestamp 2, joining the initial message Init.
Every core keeps a coherence view, a timestamp per location that restricts which writes a load
may read from, initially at 0. When executing a load, it can only read from writes whose timestamp
is at least the coherence view, and also raises the coherence view to the timestamp it has read from.
The coherence view admits the weak outcome a0=1, a1=0 only when x and y are distinct. When
the addresses are distinct (Fig. 4a) reading a0 from @2 raises the view of y to 2, while its view of x
is still 0, allowing a1 to read from the initial state. When x and y are the same location (Fig. 4b), the
first read raises the view to 2, so a1 must read from a write as young as @2.
Stores take effect out of order through promises. A thread may promise a future write, making it
visible to other cores and itself before it reaches that write in program order. Promises thus admit
store–store and store–load weak outcomes. To avoid out-of-thin-air behaviors, a promise must be
certifiable: the promising thread must be able to fulfill all promises when running in isolation.
Promises make the promising semantics in-order rather than compromise it. Each thread executes
its instructions one at a time in program order, so no instruction takes effect before its program-
order predecessors. The model relaxes only the order in which a write becomes visible, never the
order in which instructions run. When a thread later reaches the promised store in program order,
it fulfills exactly the message it promised.
Promising semantics additionally support acquire and release fences, and atomics which interact
with views in non-trivial ways, requiring multiple kinds of additional thread-local views. We refer
interested readers to Kang et al. [14], Pulte et al. [24] for the full details.
2.3
Transitive and Compositional Refinement
We explain the definition of modules and refinement between them, and its key properties, transi-
tivity and compositionality. Fjfj [3] realizes modular refinement for Bluespec-style modules, and
our development builds on it. A module is a labelled transition system over a private state space,
its value methods reading the state and its action methods updating it. It is either primitive, with
its transitions given directly as axiomatized specifications, or composed, built from submodules.


8
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
In Fjfj, an implementation module 𝑀𝑖refines the specification module 𝑀𝑠, written 𝑀𝑖⊑𝑀𝑠,
when there exists a simulation relation between their states such that (1) related states are indistin-
guishable through the method interface; and (2) every method and rule of 𝑀𝑖preserves the relation.
Refinement is transitive and composable:
𝑀1 ⊑𝑀2 =⇒𝑀2 ⊑𝑀3 =⇒𝑀1 ⊑𝑀3,
𝑀𝑖⊑𝑀𝑠=⇒𝐶[𝑀𝑖] ⊑𝐶[𝑀𝑠],
where 𝐶is a module with submodule 𝑀𝑖. Transitivity lets us build a refinement incrementally
through intermediate specifications. Compositionality permits freely replacing a submodule with
its specification and vice versa.
Fjfj also provides a more traditional trace semantics, given as a sequence of method calls. Refine-
ment implies inclusion between trace sets, which we write 𝑀𝑖⊆𝑀𝑠. The trace inclusion of Fjfj
guarantees only safety, leaving liveness properties, such as eventual retirement, outside our scope.
3
Proof Overview
We first develop the proof of Theorem 1 in a high-level narrative, while §4 expands each of
the two steps into its bottom-up, per-module proof. We utilize transitivity and compositionality
to decompose it into two steps meeting at the heart of the proof, the core specification Core𝑠
(§3.1). The two steps are the core refinement Core𝑖⊑Core𝑠(§3.2); and the system inclusion
𝑛· Core𝑠+ ShMem ⊆ISA (§3.3).
3.1
The Specification Core𝑠
Fig. 5 describes how Core𝑠specifies the core. Compared to Core𝑖, it abstracts the method for
speculation detection, the concrete cause of out-of-order execution, and duplicate sources of
instruction metadata.
State. Figure 5a describes the internal state of Core𝑠. At the center is the program-order sequence
of instruction consisting of a 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒prefix and a 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡suffix. A key property is that we do not
discard retired instructions but place them in 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒, so for each in-flight instruction, |𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒| +
index in 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡serves as a unique id, and for retired ones, their index in 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒serves as one. We use
such an id to track the origin of forwarded stores, which allows us to efficiently compute coherence
violations. Each retired instruction is either a to-be-drained store’s write to memory (WrMem) or
is None, and each 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡entry is an Inst. The core also has “architectural state”, consisting of the
program counter 𝑝𝑐and register file 𝑟𝑓. Finally, it has 𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔, 𝑠𝑏𝑎𝑔, and 𝑎𝑒𝑥𝑡, holding outstanding
load, store, and atomic requests.
Interface. Core𝑠has the same seven methods as Core𝑖(§2.1). GetRf returns 𝑟𝑓of the specification
core. The memory methods thread request payloads through 𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔, 𝑠𝑏𝑎𝑔, and 𝑎𝑒𝑥𝑡(Fig. 5b). 𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔is
a per-address collection of two lists. The first contains requested loads, recording the request index
and the index of the load in the instruction list. An index of None indicates that the corresponding
load was squashed. The second contains issued but not yet requested loads (§2.1), recording just the
index. We collect them in a per-address list as two load requests to the same address are responded
to in the order they are made by ShMem. 𝑠𝑏𝑎𝑔is a finite map from store request ids (𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥) to the
corresponding address. Unlike loads, a core can only have one request for each address, so a finite
map suffices. 𝑎𝑒𝑥𝑡records the target address and type (Lr or Sc) of the core’s atomic operation.
Internal transitions. An instruction advances through internal steps until it retires from the
head of 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡to 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒(Fig. 5b). We illustrate the three cases causing excess behaviors, a load, a
forwarded load, and a mispredicted branch, and show how the specification handles them similarly.


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
9
Types
Core𝑠=


𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒: list (optionWrMem);
𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡: list Inst;
𝑝𝑐: Val;
𝑟𝑓: ValRegNum;
𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔: Addr →
List (𝐿𝑑𝐼𝑑𝑥× N)
× List N
𝑠𝑏𝑎𝑔: 𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥
fin
−⇀Addr;
𝑎𝑒𝑥𝑡: option (Addr, AtomicReq)


Inst ≜Bin | Br | Ld | St | Atomic | Fence
(a) Types of Core𝑠.
(b) Design of Core𝑠.
(c) How excessive loads are squashed.
(d) How excessive forwarded loads are squashed.
(e) How mispredicted branches are squashed.
Fig. 5. The types and design of Core𝑠
Fig. 5c describes the execution of Fig. 1 at the Core𝑠level. At the start, the two loads are stored in
𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡in program order, with other instructions following the second load, the second load already
issued, and the address calculation for the first load not yet finished. When the address calculation
of the first load finishes, it scans later instructions to find incoherent loads. Since the second load
read from memory before the first, the younger load may have missed a newer store the older load
will read from. Thus, the second load is incoherent, so it and all later instructions are squashed.
Fig. 5d describes another execution with excess loads, this time via forwarding. Initially, there
is a store, a waiting load, and a finished load that forwarded from the store. Each responded load
records the origin, either from memory (⊥) or an earlier store, which is identified by its index in
the instruction list. When the address calculation of the first load finishes, since the index of the
forwarded store, 0, is less than the index of the load, 1, again the younger load may have missed a
newer store the older load will read from, so it is again squashed.
Fig. 5e describes the execution of a mispredicted branch at the Core𝑠level. At the start, the
branch is not yet executed, and records the predicted direction, here predicted as TAKEN, followed
by more instructions. When the branch executes and turns out to be NOT_TAKEN, we squash all
later instructions excluding the branch. Unlike loads, we can keep the branch as we know its final
result, hence there is no need to re-execute it.


10
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
Fig. 6. Design of MemUnit
3.2
Proving Core𝑖⊑Core𝑠
We describe the key ideas of the core refinement proof, Core𝑖⊑Core𝑠. The proof is done by a
simulation argument under a relation, where we must show that if Core𝑖can take a step, Core𝑠
can take zero or more steps to reestablish the simulation relation. Such matching is almost routine,
other than the mismatch of memory operation retirement in Core𝑖and Core𝑠. We first describe the
internal state of Core𝑖and the simulation relation, then the key problems and our solutions.
Submodules of Core𝑖. The specifications of the core components build Core𝑖’s internal state. ROB
is a list of instruction metadata, such as instruction id, potential destination register, and whether
it is retire-ready. ALU is a finite map from the instruction id of pure instructions to their execution
state. Figure 6 describes the specification design of MemUnit. It closely resembles Core𝑠, but records
only memory instructions in LSQ, and omits RF and PC. All of the above components carry a
speculation mask corresponding to the instruction. The RF’s state is ValRegNum, PC is simply a value,
and the branch predictor is of a unit type.
Requirement: forwarding origins must correspond. As the key component of coherence calcu-
lation is the origin of forwarded loads (Fig. 5d), it is essential that the origins of forwarded loads
recorded in MemUnit are mapped to their respective entries in Core𝑠. Otherwise, the coherence
calculations of MemUnit and Core𝑠will not match, which can lead to a load being squashed in
MemUnit but not in Core𝑠. As in-flight and retired instructions of both MemUnit and Core𝑠have a
unique id, it may seem trivial to create a one-to-one mapping between them that is easily preserved
under instruction squash. But it is not easy to do so due to the root cause of early retire of memory
instructions.
Problems from early retire of memory instructions. The hardest part of the core proof stems
from early retirement of memory instructions. In MemUnit, when a memory instruction retires
from LSQ, it is sent to 𝑚𝑒𝑚-𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑well-before the corresponding instruction is retired from the
ROB, and hence 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡. This creates two concrete problems, that of squashed memory instructions
and acquire operations.
Squashed-memory instructions. Fig. 7 presents how MemUnit creates retired instructions that
Core𝑠never retires. Initially, there is an uncompleted branch, and a load in both LSQ and 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡. We
retire the load from the LSQ, which places it inside 𝑚𝑒𝑚-𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑. The branch then turns out to be
mispredicted, which squashes the later load inside 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡. Thus, we have a memory instruction that
exists in 𝑚𝑒𝑚-𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑but not 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒nor 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, which must be filtered in the simulation relation.
To resolve this issue, the simulation uses two position maps to record squashed instructions
inside 𝑚𝑒𝑚-𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑. The total lsq_map : List N assigns each LSQ entry to its position in 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡,


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
11
Fig. 7. Execution where an instruction is in 𝑚𝑒𝑚-𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑but not in 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒. After retiring a load, an earlier
branch is determined to be mispredicted, which squashes the load and causes the two lists to disagree.
(a) The acquire problem, where LSQ commits an acquire operation and issues a younger load while Core𝑠
cannot.
(b) Core𝑠𝑓’s FinishMem transitions clears the fence’s live flag, which unblocks younger load’s issue.
Fig. 8. The acquire problem and how Core𝑠𝑓handles it.
and the partial ret_map : List (option N) assigns each 𝑚𝑒𝑚-𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑entry to its position in 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
or 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒, with None representing squashed memory instructions that Core𝑠never retired.
Acquire operations problem. Figure 8a describes the acquire operations problem, where a load
can issue from Core𝑖while Core𝑠forbids it. Initially, both LSQ and 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡hold an acquire fence
and a load whose address calculation is finished. Recall from §2.1 that an in-LSQ acquire operation
blocks younger loads from issuing, and the same goes for Core𝑠as well. We then dequeue the fence
from the LSQ, while it has yet to retire from 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡. This creates a scenario where we can issue the
load inside LSQ, but not the load inside 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, as it is still blocked by an acquire fence.
Figure 8b shows how a new intermediate specification Core𝑠𝑓, the spec with unblocking f ences,
handles the acquire problem. Core𝑠𝑓extends Core𝑠with a live flag on fence operations, and updates
the semantics of acquire fences to block younger loads only while the fence is LIVE. The example
now proceeds as follows. When we retire the fence from the LSQ, we flip the LIVE flag for the
corresponding entry in 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡to DONE, unblocking the younger load. Then, the load in 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡can
be issued in-sync with the load inside LSQ.
Composing into core refinement. The core refinement is decomposed into two refinements with
Core𝑠𝑓in between. The folding refinement Core𝑖⊑Core𝑠𝑓folds the submodules of Core𝑖into the


12
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
(a) Implementation of Core𝑠+ ShMem.
(b) Structure of TopMod without
request–response.
Fig. 9. The goal of 𝑛· Core𝑠+ ShMem ⊑TopMod, removing the request–response interface.
instruction list, utilizing the two-map structure and unblocking fences to solve the early retirement
gap. The eager-retirement refinement Core𝑠𝑓⊑Core𝑠, restores the core specification Core𝑠. The
crux of this proof is to design an invariant such that when a load issues from Core𝑠𝑓, it can also
issue from Core𝑠. As the name hints, the key idea is to retire instructions from Core𝑠as eagerly as
possible. For example, in the execution of Fig. 8b, Core𝑠will retire the acquire fence when its live
flag flips to DONE. This is possible as a fence’s live flag only flips when it is at the head of 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, so
it can be retired as well. A later retire step of Core𝑠𝑓will simply be a no-op in Core𝑠.
3.3
Proving 𝑛· Core𝑠+ ShMem ⊆ISA
We lift the per-core specification to the whole system, connecting 𝑛copies of Core𝑠to the shared-
memory specification ShMem and showing the result included in the in-order ISA. The proof is
decomposed into three steps as follows:
𝑛· Core𝑠+ ShMem ⊑TopMod ⊆ISA𝐶𝐹⊆ISA.
TopMod is the top-level implementation module composing the 𝑛cores and ShMem, and ISA𝐶𝐹is
the certification-free machine of Pulte et al. [24]. In ISA𝐶𝐹, a thread may promise without certifying,
and must instead fulfill every promise before the run ends. We take ISA𝐶𝐹as an intermediate step
as it’s lack of certification makes it easier to work with, and to re-use the proofs of Pulte et al. [24].
§4.8 details each step.
The merging refinement. Fig. 9 shows the merging refinement 𝑛· Core𝑠+ ShMem ⊑TopMod,
whose goal is to remove the bookkeeping for the request–response interface. Fig. 9a shows the
implementation of the whole system for one core, which connects the request/response interface of
the core to the matching interface of ShMem. A core files a memory request in one transition, and
ShMem picks a pending request, applies its effect to memory, and returns the response in another.
Fig. 9b shows the design of TopMod, the first specification for the whole system. TopMod keeps
each core’s 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒, 𝑝𝑐, and 𝑟𝑓together with the shared memory, leaves every core-internal
transition unchanged, and merges each request and its response into one atomic memory transition.
The threading inclusion. The threading inclusion TopMod ⊆ISA𝐶𝐹continues to the certification-
free machine, whose threads promise writes without certification and must fulfill every promise by
the end of the run. We prove trace inclusion directly instead of refinement, since choosing which
write to promise requires knowing the rest of the execution, which a step-local simulation cannot
see. The proof threads each finished TopMod execution into ISA𝐶𝐹in program order, resolving


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
13
Types
SIList 𝐼𝑑𝑥𝑇𝑆≜{𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡: List(𝑆×𝑇); 𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠: 𝐼𝑑𝑥
fin
−⇀N; 𝑤𝑓: SIListWF 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠}
Methods
(SIList-Enq)
{TLRel(𝑠𝑡.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡),𝑠𝑠)}
enq(𝑠𝑠,𝑒)
{𝑖𝑑𝑥. enqueue(𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑠𝑠,𝑒,𝑠𝑡,𝑠𝑡′)}
enqueue(𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑠𝑠,𝑒,𝑠𝑡,𝑠𝑡′, ) ≜𝑖𝑑𝑥∉𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠) ∧𝑠𝑡′.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) ++ [(𝑠𝑠,𝑒)] ∧
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠)[𝑖𝑑𝑥↦→length 𝑠𝑡.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)]
(SIList-Deq)
{𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒}
deq()
{(ℎ𝑑,𝑖𝑑𝑥). dequeue(ℎ𝑑,𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑠𝑡,𝑠𝑡′)}
dequeue ℎ𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠𝑡𝑠𝑡′ ≜∃𝑡𝑙. 𝑠𝑡.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = ℎ𝑑:: 𝑡𝑙∧
𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠)[𝑖𝑑𝑥] = 0 ∧𝑠𝑡′.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = 𝑡𝑙∧
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠) = map(𝜆𝑥. 𝑥−1, delete(𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠)))
(SIList-KillIdx)
{True} kill_idx(sid) {𝑠𝑡′ = killIdx(𝑠𝑖𝑑,𝑠𝑡)}
(SIList-Clear)
{True} clear() {𝑠𝑡′ = ⟨[]; ∅; _⟩}
Fig. 10. Specification of the sorted indexed list SIList.
the inter-core interleaving and the residual out-of-order execution. The main burden is designing
sufficient invariants to satisfy coherence, which is not difficult but cumbersome.
The certification inclusion. The certification inclusion ISA𝐶𝐹⊆ISA restores the certification
requirement, showing every ISA𝐶𝐹execution is reproduced by a certifying one. We reuse the same
proof done by Pulte et al. [24], re-proving the theorem for our notion of ISA and trace refinement,
following their structure as closely as possible.
4
Detailed Proofs of the Multiprocessor System
We specify and verify each module bottom-up, each proof giving a clean-slate specification for the
implementation. As most modules implement some form of a queue or map, their specification may
look routine. However, hardware methods are heavily pipelined, so a method call may only take
effect after several internal transitions. Pipelining is the source of proof difficulty, while hardware’s
verbose interface is merely a source of length.
We proceed through the shared building blocks (§4.1); ROB (§4.2); ALU (§4.3); LSQ (§4.4); StB
(§4.5); MemUnit (§4.6); the core refinement (§4.7); and the system inclusion (§4.8). Throughout, 𝑠𝑡
and 𝑠𝑡′ are implicitly quantified, denoting each module’s pre- and post-state.
Method specification is given a Hoare triple {𝑃(𝑠𝑡,𝑎)} 𝑒(𝑎) {𝑟𝑒𝑡.𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎,𝑠𝑡′,𝑟𝑒𝑡)}, which states
that if 𝑒(𝑎) is called while 𝑃(𝑠𝑡,𝑎) is satisfied, 𝑒returns 𝑟𝑒𝑡and updates the state to 𝑠𝑡′ satisfying
𝑄(𝑠𝑡,𝑎,𝑠𝑡′,𝑟𝑒𝑡). We make the encoding precise in §5.
4.1
Common Building Blocks
The ROB, ALU, and MemUnit rest on three shared modules, the sorted indexed list (SIList), the
speculation-tag manager (SMan), and RS, we thus specify these modules first. All three are them-
selves verified modules, each with its own implementation and refinement proofs which we omit.
ROB uses SIList and SMan, ALU uses RS, and MemUnit uses SIList and RS. While SMan is only
used in one of them, the speculation mechanism itself is used by ALU and MemUnit.
Sorted indexed list. Figure 10 specifies the sorted indexed list SIList 𝐼𝑑𝑥𝑇𝑆, a 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡of type𝑇where
each entry additionally carries an abstract tag of an ordered type 𝑆. SIList also lets a client access


14
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
Types
𝑠𝑡∈SManS ≜{𝑙: List 𝑆𝐼𝑑; 𝑁𝐷: NoDup 𝑙}
Methods
(ST-Current)
{True} current() {𝑠. 𝑠= toBitSet 𝑠𝑡.𝑙}
(ST-Claim)
{True} claim() {𝑠𝑖𝑑. 𝑠𝑡′.𝑙= 𝑠𝑖𝑑:: 𝑠𝑡.𝑙}
(ST-Correct)
{True}
correct(𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥)
{𝑠𝑡′.𝑙= remove 𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠𝑡.𝑙}
(ST-Wrong)
{True} wrong(𝑘){𝑠𝑡′.𝑙=
(
[ ]
𝑘= All
killFrom 𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠𝑡.𝑙
𝑘= One𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥}
Fig. 11. Specification of the speculation-tag manager SMan.
elements at an arbitrary index of type 𝐼𝑑𝑥. It additionally carries a finite map 𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠mapping the
stable index to an index of the list. The list is sorted with respect to the type 𝑆. 𝑆records the
element’s speculation state, namely the branch instructions it depends on. Because the list is sorted
by this speculation tag, the tags grow monotonically along program order, so SIList-KillIdx removes
a suffix of the list rather than scattered entries. We use a generic type as different lists need to record
different information about speculation state. LSQ stores only each entry’s branch dependence,
while the ROB also marks whether the entry is itself a branch. The well-formedness predicate 𝑤𝑓
relates 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡and 𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠and enforces the sort order.
The methods cover a typical queue lifecycle (enq and deq), a speculative kill, and a reset. SIList-
Enq adds a new entry and returns a fresh index 𝑖𝑑𝑥, given that the new tag keeps the list sorted
(the TLRel premise). SIList-Deq removes and returns the first element of the list, along with the
removed index. SIList-KillIdx applies 𝑘𝑖𝑙𝑙𝐼𝑑𝑥, which finds the first element whose tag includes 𝑠𝑖𝑑
and removes it and all later elements. SIList-Clear resets the list to a fresh state.
Speculation-tag manager. Figure 11 specifies SMan as a duplicate-free list of speculation tags
with the newest at the head, where 𝑆𝐼𝑑is the tag type. ST-Current returns the current status of
SMan as a speculation mask, a bitset of 𝑆𝐼𝑑s. ST-Claim allocates a new speculation tag and prepends
it to the list. ST-Correct resolves a correct prediction by removing its tag 𝑠𝑖𝑑from the list. ST-Wrong
either clears SMan entirely (𝑘= All) or drops every tag from the head down to 𝑠𝑖𝑑(𝑘= One 𝑠𝑖𝑑).
Reservation station. Figure 12 specifies RS, which holds each pending instruction’s source
operands until they are ready. RS 𝐼𝑑𝑥is a finite map from an index type 𝐼𝑑𝑥to the reservation
station entry, RSE. Each RSE holds two source operands (𝑟1, 𝑟2) and the entry’s speculation mask
(𝑠𝑠), a set of 𝑆𝐼𝑑. RsSrc either waits for the instruction with index 𝑖𝑑𝑥, or holds a finished value 𝑣𝑎𝑙.
The methods insert and issue entries, snoop results into waiting operands, and resolves spec-
ulations. Rs-Insert adds a new entry to the reservation station. Rs-Issue removes and returns an
entry whose source operands are both ready. Rs-Snoop finds the source operands waiting on 𝑖𝑑𝑥
and sets them ready with 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎. Rs-CorrectSpec drops a correctly predicted branch’s tag 𝑠𝑖𝑑from
every entry’s 𝑠𝑠. Rs-WrongSpec clears the entire reservation station (𝑘= All), or removes entries
dependent on a mispredicted branch (𝑘= One 𝑠𝑖𝑑).
4.2
The Reorder Buffer
The ROB allocates a slot for each fetched instruction, dequeues the instructions in program order,
and in our design also manages speculation. Unlike typical designs that keep SMan as a separate
module, we embed it inside the ROB, so the ROB’s own methods allocate speculation tags. The


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
15
Types
𝑠𝑡∈𝐼𝑑𝑥
fin
−⇀RSE 𝐼𝑑𝑥
RSE 𝐼𝑑𝑥≜{𝑟1 : RsSrc 𝐼𝑑𝑥, 𝑟2 : RsSrc 𝐼𝑑𝑥, 𝑠𝑠: SSet}
RsSrc 𝐼𝑑𝑥≜Wait (𝑖𝑑𝑥: 𝐼𝑑𝑥) | Data (𝑣𝑎𝑙: 𝑉𝑎𝑙)
Methods
(Rs-Insert)
{dst ∉dom(𝑠𝑡)}
insert(dst, e)
{𝑠𝑡′ = 𝑠𝑡[dst ↦→e]}
(Rs-Issue)
{True} issue(){(𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑑1,𝑑2).
𝑠𝑡[𝑖𝑑𝑥] = ⟨Data 𝑑1, Data 𝑑2, _⟩∧
𝑠𝑡′ = delete(𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑠𝑡)
}
(Rs-Snoop)
{True}
snoop(idx, data)
{𝑠𝑡′ = map (𝜆𝑒. snoop 𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑒) 𝑠𝑡}
(Rs-CorrectSpec)
{True}
correct_spec(sidx)
{𝑠𝑡′ = map (𝜆⟨𝑟1,𝑟2,𝑠𝑠⟩. ⟨𝑟1,𝑟2,𝑠𝑠\ {[𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥]}⟩) 𝑠𝑡}
(Rs-WrongSpec)
{True} wrong_spec(𝑘){𝑠𝑡′ =
(
∅
𝑘= All
filter(𝜆𝑟𝑠𝑒.𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥∉𝑟𝑠𝑒.𝑠𝑠,𝑠𝑡)
𝑘= One sidx}
Fig. 12. Specification of the reservation station RS.
Types
𝑠𝑡∈SIList 𝐼𝑑𝑥RobE RobSS
RobE ≜{𝑑𝑠𝑡: option Reg; 𝑒𝑥: option RobSt}
RobSS ≜{𝑠𝑠: SSet; 𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑑: option SId}
RobSt ≜Done (𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙: option Val) | IsStore
Selected Methods
(Rob-Enq)
{True} enq(𝑏,𝑒){
(idx, ss, osid).
𝑏⇔osid ≠None ∧
𝑠𝑡′ = 𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑖𝑑𝑥, ⟨𝑠𝑠,𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑑⟩,𝑒,𝑠𝑡)∧
(𝑠𝑡.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = [ ] →𝑠𝑠= ∅)
}
(Rob-ReadReg)
{True}
read_reg(reg)
{ret. ret = lastWrite(reg,𝑠𝑡)}
(Rob-Deq)
{∀𝑒. head(𝑠𝑡.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)) = 𝑒→𝑒.2.(𝑒𝑥) ≠None →𝑒.1.𝑠𝑠= ∅}
deq()
{(idx,𝑒). 𝑒.2.(𝑒𝑥) ≠None ∧dequeue(𝑒,𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑠𝑡,𝑠𝑡′)}
(Rob-CorrectSpec)
{True}
correct_spec(sid)
{𝑠𝑡′ = correctSpec sid 𝑠𝑡}
(Rob-WrongSpec)
{True} wrong_spec(𝑘){𝑠𝑡′ =
(
⟨[ ]; ∅; _⟩
𝑘= All
filter(𝜆𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒.𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥∉𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒.2.𝑠𝑠,𝑠𝑡)
𝑘= One sidx}
(Rob-Update)
{∃𝑡𝑎𝑔,𝑠𝑡. (𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠)[𝑖𝑑𝑥] = 𝑡𝑎𝑔} set_exec(𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓) {𝑠𝑡′.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = alter(𝑓,𝑡𝑎𝑔,𝑠𝑡.(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡))}
Fig. 13. Specification of the reorder buffer ROB.


16
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
main benefit is that a client interacts with a single allocator module rather than juggling multiple.
A client also need not keep the internal states of SMan and the buffer in sync, because the ROB
refinement establishes it instead.
Specification. Figure 13 specifies the ROB as a SIList 𝐼𝑑𝑥RobE RobSS. RobE records the destination
register𝑑𝑠𝑡(if any) and an optional execution state𝑒𝑥, None until the instruction executes. Execution
state is either 𝐷𝑜𝑛𝑒, carrying the register write (if any) and any pc redirect, or 𝐼𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑒. RobSS
records two pieces of speculation information for an entry, the speculation mask it depends on
(𝑠𝑠) and, for a branch entry, its own tag (𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑑). The sort order precisely captures the speculation
state: For adjacent entries 𝑒1,𝑒2, if 𝑒1 is a branch with tag 𝑠𝑖𝑑then 𝑒2.𝑠𝑠= 𝑒1.𝑠𝑠∪{𝑠𝑖𝑑}; otherwise
𝑒2.𝑠𝑠= 𝑒1.𝑠𝑠.
The methods layer speculation bookkeeping over the list operations. Rob-Enq adds a new in-
struction. Like SIList-Enq it allocates an index 𝑖𝑑𝑥, and it additionally assigns the speculation mask
𝑠𝑠and, for a branch (𝑏= true), a fresh tag 𝑠𝑖𝑑. As a special case, it ensures that if the ROB is empty,
𝑠𝑠is empty as well. Rob-Deq removes the head entry from the ROB, given that an executed head
has an empty 𝑠𝑠, and guarantees the dequeued entry is executed. The empty-𝑠𝑠condition holds
because every branch before a committing instruction is already resolved. Rob-ReadReg performs a
“register read” on the ROB, trying to obtain the data for the latest entry with destination register 𝑟𝑒𝑔.
Rob-Update updates an entry at index 𝑖𝑑𝑥according to the function 𝑓. Rob-CorrectSpec removes
tag 𝑠𝑖𝑑from every entry and from the 𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑑of the matching entry. Rob-WrongSpec either clears or
filters the ROB, similar to Rs-WrongSpec.
Implementation. The implementation composes SIList 𝐼𝑑𝑥RobE SSet (the tag type is SSet, not
RobSS) with SMan, and each method forwards to the matching submodule methods.
Proof. The main invariant is that a tag lies in the implementation’s SMan exactly when it appears
in 𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑑of some entry of the specification ROB, while maintaining monotonicity. Rob-Enq is the
only hard case. Its use of SIList-Enq needs the ST-Current postcondition together with the fact that
every tag in SMan already appears in the ROB. The other cases are routine.
4.3
The Arithmetic Unit
The arithmetic unit executes binary (Bin) and branch (Br) instructions out of order.
Specification. Figure 14 specifies the arithmetic unit, whose methods mirror the reservation
station’s up to result computation. The ALU’s state pairs an operation type with a reservation-
station entry (Fig. 12). Only Alu-Exec differs, additionally computing the result, including branch
speculation result, snooping it to the remaining entries, and deleting the issued entry.
Implementation. The ALU is a standard pipelined design, a reservation station feeding a pipelined
execution queue. Once the station issues an operation, the queue holds it while the result is
computed, until the ALU removes it.
Proof. The proof removes the implementation’s internal pipeline rules. We relate the specification
ALU state to a folded view of the implementation’s RS and execution queue. The key step is
Alu-Exec, which essentially applies Rs-Issue and the result computation in one move.
4.4
The Load–Store Queue
The LSQ is the core’s most intricate module, with the most verbose interface and the most heavily
pipelined internal state, which its specification reflects.


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
17
Types
𝑠𝑡∈𝐼𝑑𝑥
fin
−⇀(AluOp × RSE 𝐼𝑑𝑥)
Methods
(Alu-Insert)
{𝑖𝑑𝑥∉dom(𝑠𝑡)}
add(𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑒)
{𝑠𝑡′ = 𝑠𝑡[𝑖𝑑𝑥↦→𝑒]}
(Alu-Exec)
{True} exec(){
𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑟𝑒𝑠.
𝑠𝑡(𝑖𝑑𝑥) = (𝑜𝑝, ⟨Data𝑑1, Data𝑑2, _⟩) ∧
𝑟𝑒𝑠= eval(𝑜𝑝,𝑑1,𝑑2) ∧
𝑠𝑡′ = delete(𝑖𝑑𝑥, (snoop(𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑟𝑒𝑠,𝑠𝑡)))}
(Alu-Snoop)
{True}
snoop(𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎)
{𝑠𝑡′ = map(𝜆𝑒.𝑠𝑛𝑜𝑜𝑝(𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎,𝑒),𝑠𝑡)}
(Alu-CorrectSpec)
{True}
correct_spec(𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥)
{𝑠𝑡′ = map(𝜆⟨𝑟1,𝑟2,𝑠𝑠⟩. ⟨𝑟1,𝑟2,𝑠𝑠\ {[𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥]}⟩,𝑠𝑡)}
(Alu-WrongSpec)
{True} wrong_spec(𝑘){𝑠𝑡′ =
(
∅
𝑘= All
filter(𝜆𝑟𝑠𝑒.𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥∉𝑟𝑠𝑒.𝑠𝑠,𝑠𝑡)
𝑘= One𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑥}
Fig. 14. Specification of the arithmetic unit ALU.
Specification. Figure 15 and Fig. 16 specify the LSQ. It is similar to the specifications of Core𝑠and
MemUnit, but does not have a full 𝑠𝑏𝑎𝑔. It consists of a SIList 𝑖𝑛of in-flight memory operations, a
per-address load bag 𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔, which keeps per address an issued list and a requested list, and a list
𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒of retired writes. Each entry, an LSE, carries an at-commit flag and an operation, one of a
load, store, load-reserved, store-conditional, or fence.
We describe the methods of the LSQ, omitting those shared with SIList, first following the life
cycle of a load instruction (Fig. 16), then other auxiliary methods (Fig. 15). LSQ-RdyLd marks a
load’s address as computed. It then kills every younger load to the same address that violates
coherence, namely one that (1) has been issued, (2) has received a response from memory, or
(3) has been forwarded from a store older than the just-readied load. The store, load-reserve, and
store-conditional resolutions are analogous and omitted. LSQ-IssueLd issues a ready load, recording
the request in 𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔, when it cannot be forwarded from the store buffer or an in-flight store in
the LSQ. LSQ-IssueLd-Fwd instead forwards from an in-flight store, completing the store in one
step. LSQ-ReqLd carries the issued load to memory, moving its bag entry from the issued list to the
requested list. LSQ-RespLd-Live brings the response back, updating the load to its response state.
The case of a response to a squashed load, which the queue discards, is omitted. LSQ-SetComm
marks an entry as committed, i.e., at the ROB head. Committing matters for fences and atomic
instructions, which can take effect only at the ROB head. LSQ-DeqSt retires a ready store into 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒,
but only if it is guaranteed the 𝑠𝑠is empty. LSQ-DeqRetire pops the first committed write off 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒.
LSQ-DeqNonSt dequeues the committed head entry when it is not a store and 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒is empty.
Implementation. The implementation combines a RS, an SIList 𝐿𝑑𝐼𝑑𝑥((LSE 𝐼𝑑𝑥) × 𝐼𝑑𝑥) SSet,
and a finite request map from 𝐿𝑑𝐼𝑑𝑥to bool that records the issued load indexes. RS plays the same
role as it did in ALU, storing the source operands of memory operations and dispatching them once
ready, updating the corresponding LSQ entries. The implementation LSQ is indexed by its own
𝐿𝑑𝐼𝑑𝑥rather than the ROB’s 𝐼𝑑𝑥, and each entry records the 𝐼𝑑𝑥of its ROB entry. Reusing 𝐼𝑑𝑥
would force the LSQ to allocate a slot for each non-memory instruction and would tie an entry’s
lifetime to the ROB, which would be wasteful for LSQ that only needs to track memory operations.


18
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
Types
𝑠𝑡∈LSQ 𝐼𝑑𝑥𝐿𝑑𝐼𝑑𝑥𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥
WrMem ≜{𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟: Addr; 𝑣𝑎𝑙: Val; }
LSE 𝐼𝑑𝑥≜{𝑎𝑡_𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚: bool; 𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦: LSSt 𝐼𝑑𝑥}
LdSt 𝐼𝑑𝑥≜Wait(𝑟: RsSrc 𝐼𝑑𝑥) | Rdy (𝑎: Addr)
| Issue (𝑘: bool) (𝑎: Addr)
| Resp (𝑘: bool) (𝑎: Addr) (𝑑: Val) (𝑜: option N)
LSQ 𝐼𝑑𝑥≜


𝑖𝑛: SIList 𝐼𝑑𝑥(LSE 𝐼𝑑𝑥) SSet;
𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔: Addr →
List (𝐿𝑑𝐼𝑑𝑥× option N)
× List N

;
𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒: List WrMem;


LSSt 𝐼𝑑𝑥≜Ld (𝑑𝑠𝑡: Reg) (𝑙𝑑: LdSt 𝐼𝑑𝑥)
| St (𝑠𝑡: StSt 𝐼𝑑𝑥)
| Lr (𝑑𝑠𝑡: Reg) (𝑙𝑟: LrSt 𝐼𝑑𝑥)
| Sc (𝑑𝑠𝑡: Reg) (𝑠𝑐: ScSt 𝐼𝑑𝑥)
| Fence (𝑎𝑐𝑞𝑟𝑒𝑙: bool)
Methods
(LSQ-DeqSt)
{
∃𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟,𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎. 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠)[𝑖𝑑𝑥] = 0 ∧
𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[0].1.(𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦) = St (Rdy𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎)
𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡).0 = ∅
}
deq_st(𝑖𝑑𝑥){
dequeue(_,𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛),𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛))∧
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) ++ [⟨𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟,𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎⟩]}
(LSQ-DeqRetire)
{True}
deq_retire()
{ℎ𝑑.
∃𝑡𝑙. 𝑠𝑡.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) = ℎ𝑑:: 𝑡𝑙
∧𝑠𝑡′.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) = 𝑡𝑙
}
(LSQ-DeqNonSt)
{True} deq_non_st(){(𝑒,𝑖𝑑𝑥).
𝑒is not a store ∧𝑠𝑡.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) = []
dequeue(⟨true,𝑒⟩,𝑖𝑑𝑥,𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛),𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛))}
(LSQ-SetComm)
{∃𝑡𝑎𝑔,𝑠𝑡. (𝑖𝑛).(𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠)[𝑖𝑑𝑥] = 𝑡𝑎𝑔}
set_comm(𝑖𝑑𝑥)
{𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[𝑡𝑎𝑔↦→⟨true,𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[𝑡𝑎𝑔].(𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦)⟩]}
Fig. 15. Specification of the load–store queue LSQ (state and commit methods).
Reusing a load index while its response is outstanding is an instance of the classic ABA prob-
lem [32]. Concretely, if a load requested with id 𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑥is squashed before its response arrives and
its index is re-allocated, LSQ-RespLd-Live would deliver the squashed load’s stale response to the
new entry, which is clearly incorrect. The request map therefore reserves a load index from issue
until its response drains, so a squashed load’s index is never re-allocated while its response is
outstanding. The map marks 𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑥on issue and forbids allocating a marked index until the response
clears it.
The implementation keeps no separate structure for the specification’s 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒list. A committed
store instead stays in the LSQ as a ready-to-retire entry, so 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒is a contiguous prefix of the LSQ
itself. LSQ-DeqSt marks the store ready in place rather than dequeuing it, and LSQ-DeqRetire later
pops the segment’s oldest entry, which the memory unit passes on to the store buffer (§4.6).
Proof. The difficult part of the proof is on how LSQ-DeqSt keeps a committed store in the implemen-
tation LSQ while the specification dequeues it into 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒. The simulation relation mainly consists
of the following three facts: (1) the folded view of the reservation station and the implementation
LSQ equals the specification LSQ; (2) the ready-to-retire prefix in the implementation LSQ, folded
to its write effects, equals the specification’s 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒and has an empty 𝑠𝑠; and (3) the map from
𝐿𝑑𝐼𝑑𝑥to 𝐼𝑑𝑥induced by the implementation SIList is injective. The second invariant ensures that


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
19
Methods (cont.)
(LSQ-RdyLd)
{True} rdy(){
𝑖𝑑𝑥.
∃𝑡𝑎𝑔,𝑑𝑠𝑡,𝑎. 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[𝑡𝑎𝑔] = ⟨_, Ld𝑑𝑠𝑡(Wait (Data𝑎))⟩
𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑖𝑑𝑥𝑠)[𝑖𝑑𝑥] = Some𝑡𝑎𝑔
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = take𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) ++ [⟨_, Ld𝑑𝑠𝑡(Rdy𝑎)⟩]
++ map (KillLd𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑔) (drop (𝑡𝑎𝑔+ 1) 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡))}
(LSQ-IssueLd)
{True} issue(𝑠𝑡𝑏_𝑖𝑠𝑠){
∃𝑡𝑎𝑔,𝑑𝑠𝑡,𝑎. 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[𝑡𝑎𝑔] = ⟨_, Ld𝑑𝑠𝑡(Rdy𝑎)⟩
FwdLSQ(𝑠𝑡,𝑡𝑎𝑔,𝑠𝑡𝑏_𝑖𝑠𝑠) = None
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[𝑡𝑎𝑔↦→⟨_, Ld𝑑𝑠𝑡(Issue false𝑎)⟩]
(𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔) 𝑎).2 = (𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔) 𝑎).2 ++ [Some 𝑡𝑎𝑔]
}
(LSQ-IssueLd-Fwd)
{True} issue(𝑠𝑡𝑏_𝑖𝑠𝑠){
∃𝑡𝑎𝑔,𝑑𝑠𝑡,𝑎. 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[𝑡𝑎𝑔] = ⟨_, Ld𝑑𝑠𝑡(Rdy𝑎)⟩
∃𝑑. FwdLSQ(𝑠𝑡,𝑡𝑎𝑔,𝑠𝑡𝑏_𝑖𝑠𝑠) = Some 𝑑
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[𝑡𝑎𝑔↦→⟨_, Ld𝑑𝑠𝑡(Resp false𝑎𝑑)⟩]}
(LSQ-ReqLd)
{True} req_ld(){(𝑙𝑖𝑑,𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟).
∃𝑜𝑖,𝑡𝑙. (𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔) 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟).2 = 𝑜𝑖:: 𝑡𝑙∧𝑙𝑖𝑑fresh ∧
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔) 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟= ⟨(𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔) 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟).1 ++ [⟨𝑙𝑖𝑑,𝑜𝑖⟩], 𝑡𝑙⟩}
(LSQ-RespLd-Live)
{∃𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟,𝑡𝑎𝑔,𝑡𝑙. (𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔) 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟).1 = ⟨𝑙𝑖𝑑, Some 𝑡𝑎𝑔⟩:: 𝑡𝑙}
resp_ld(𝑙𝑖𝑑,𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎)
{
∃𝑑𝑠𝑡,𝑘. 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[𝑡𝑎𝑔] = ⟨_, Ld 𝑑𝑠𝑡(Issue 𝑘𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟)⟩∧
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡)[𝑡𝑎𝑔↦→⟨_, Ld 𝑑𝑠𝑡(Resp 𝑘𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎None)⟩] ∧
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔) 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟= ⟨𝑡𝑙, (𝑠𝑡.(𝑖𝑛).(𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔) 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟).2⟩
}
Fig. 16. Load methods of the load–store queue LSQ.
such ready-to-retire stores are not squashed by a mispredicted branch (One). For a squashed load,
the implementation simply does not squash such ready-to-retire entries. Together, these ensure
that ready-to-retire stores of the implementation are not squashed, which allows us to abstract
them and combine them into the StB (§4.6).
4.5
The Store Buffer
The store buffer (StB) collects retired stores, sends store requests to memory, and responds to them
by coalescing the buffered writes to one address into a single memory write.
Specification. Figure 17 specifies StB as a list 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒of committed writes and a finite map 𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞of
requested addresses. 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒’s length never decreases and its positions are never reused, which is
what makes a position a stable identifier that can record a load’s forwarding origin.
The methods of the StB add new entries, send requests and responses, and check for forwarded
values. Stb-Fwd scans 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒and returns the data for the last entry with matching address, if any.
Stb-EnqSt appends a store’s write to 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒. Stb-EnqEmpty instead appends an empty entry when


20
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
Types
𝑠𝑡∈StsBag𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥
StsBag𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥≜{𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒: List(option WrMem); 𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞: 𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥
fin
−⇀Addr}
Methods
(Stb-Fwd)
{True}
fwd(𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟)
{𝑟. 𝑟= fwd𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟, 𝑠𝑡.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒)}
(Stb-EnqSt)
{True}
enq_st(𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟,𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎)
{𝑠𝑡′.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) ++ [Some ⟨𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟,𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎⟩]}
(Stb-EnqEmpty)
{True}
enq_empty()
{𝑠𝑡′.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) ++ [None]}
(Stb-ReqSt)
{True} req_st(){
(𝑠𝑖𝑑,𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟).
𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟is in 𝑠𝑡.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒)
𝑠𝑖𝑑, 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟fresh in 𝑠𝑡.(𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞) ∧
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞)[𝑠𝑖𝑑↦→𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟]}
(Stb-RespSt)
{𝑠𝑖𝑑∈dom𝑠𝑡.(𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞)} resp_st(𝑠𝑖𝑑){
𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎.
∃𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟. 𝑠𝑡.(𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞)[𝑠𝑖𝑑] = 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟∧
fwd𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑠𝑡.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) = Some𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎∧
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞) = delete𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑠𝑡.(𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞)
𝑠𝑡′.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) = 𝑠𝑡.(𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒) with matching entries flipped to None}
Fig. 17. Specification of the store buffer SB.
Types
MemUnit 𝐼𝑑𝑥𝐿𝑑𝐼𝑑𝑥𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥≜


𝑙𝑠𝑞: SIList 𝐼𝑑𝑥(LSE 𝐼𝑑𝑥) SSet;
𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔: Addr →
List (𝐿𝑑𝐼𝑑𝑥× option N)
× List N

;
𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒: List (option WrMem);
𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞: 𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥
fin
−⇀Addr;
𝑎𝑒𝑥𝑡: option (Addr × AtomicReq);


Fig. 18. Type of the memory unit MemUnit.
a non-store instruction retires, keeping 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒’s positions aligned with retirement order for the
forwarding-origin bookkeeping. Stb-ReqSt requests an address in 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒that is not yet in 𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞,
extending 𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞with a fresh 𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥for it. Stb-RespSt takes an in-flight request’s id, returns the
address’s last matching entry in 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒, deletes the request from 𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞, and blanks the drained entries
in 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒to None.
Implementation. The implementation builds upon a single map module, where the key type is
𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑑𝑥, and each element tracks address, data, and issued status. Only enq_st is nontrivial, updating
the entry that matches the store’s address and allocating one otherwise.
Proof. The proof is relatively simple, relying on the following relation: (1) the specification’s 𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑞
map is the implementation map with its non-issued entries dropped; and (2) the value that 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒
forwards for an address equals the data the implementation map stores for it
4.6
The Memory Unit
MemUnit ties together the LSQ and StB, along with a register storing the state of atomic requests.
We thus present a brief description and omit method specifications.


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
21
Fig. 19. The simulation relating Core𝑖to Core𝑠𝑓.
Fig. 20. The simulation relating Core𝑠𝑓to Core𝑠.
Specification. Figure 18 presents the type of MemUnit, a combination of the LSQ and StB com-
ponents with the two 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒lists merged into one, mem-retired. It adds a 𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔slot for the
outstanding atomic request.
Implementation. Most operations from the LSQ and StB are lifted verbatim. The only meaningful
connections are (1) threading the result of the StB’s fwd into the LSQ’s issue; and (2) passing the
entry that the LSQ’s deq_retire returns to the SB’s enq_st.
Proof. The non-trivial invariant states that the specification’s 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒equals the StB’s appended
with the LSQ’s. The invariant lets the proof hide the move of a retired store from the LSQ to the
StB as an internal pipeline step.
4.7
The Core Refinement
Recall from §3.2 the two problems from early memory retirement, the squashed-memory instruc-
tions and the early-acquire, and how we suggested two position maps and an intermediate core
specification Core𝑠𝑓as a solution. This subsection supplies the detailed proofs. We first explain
the components of the folding refinement (Core𝑖⊑Core𝑠𝑓) and then those of the eager-retirement
refinement (Core𝑠𝑓⊑Core𝑠).
The simulation for folding refinement. Fig. 19 describes the simulation relation for the folding
refinement. ROB and 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡have a one-to-one correspondence. In particular, one can retire if and
only if the other can. Every entry of ALU has a corresponding instruction in 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡. 𝑎𝑒𝑥𝑡, 𝑠𝑏𝑎𝑔, and
𝑙𝑏𝑎𝑔of MemUnit match routinely to Core𝑠𝑓and is omitted.
The intricate part of the simulation is the mapping from 𝑚𝑒𝑚-𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑑and LSQ, for which we
use the two maps lsq_map and ret_map. Using them, we define a translation function 𝜏translating
instruction index of MemUnit to that of Core𝑠:
𝜏(𝑡) :=
(
ret_map[𝑡]
if 𝑡< |ret_map|,
(map(𝜆𝑥.𝑥+ |𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒|, lsq_map)[𝑡−|ret_map|]
otherwise.
An index inside mem-retired looks up ret_map, and a position past it indexes the LSQ, looking up
lsq_map and landing in 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡behind the |𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒| entries that Core𝑠already retired. We then relate
the origins of forwarded loads for corresponding MemUnit and Core𝑠entries via 𝜏, which ensures
that coherence calculation results in the same outcome. We maintain the following invariant to
guarantee the consistency of 𝜏under squashes. For a forwarded store, the index must be strictly
smaller then the load; which ensures that squashes keeps a surviving load’s origin intact


22
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
The simulation for eager retirement. Fig. 20 describes the simulation relation for the eager-
retirement refinement. Its main machinery is the eager_closure function, which computes the
retireable prefix of Core𝑠𝑓’s 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, moving register writes into Core𝑠’s 𝑟𝑓and stores into 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒,
removing the live flags along the way. For the situation in Fig. 20, it computes that the fence and
binary instructions are done, and maps them to the retire state of Core𝑠, leaving the waiting load
untouched.
To prove that we can always retire a fence in Core𝑠when we mark it as DONE in Core𝑠𝑓, we
maintain the following invariant on Core𝑠𝑓’s state:
∀𝑝, acq, rel. flight[𝑝] = Fence(acq, rel, DONE) →𝑝= 0 ∧(rel →∀𝑒∈𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒. 𝑒= None).
A DONE fence sits at the head of flight, and if it is a release fence, it leaves no write pending in 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒.
The head conjunct, 𝑝= 0, makes every DONE fence retire under the closure, so Core𝑠does not block
the loads that Core𝑠𝑓already unblocked. The drain conjunct ensures that even release fences at the
head of Core𝑠𝑓can retire early in Core𝑠. A release fence’s retirement condition demands a fully
drained 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒, so the drain clause lets the closure safely retire them in Core𝑠.
4.8
Proving 𝑛· Core𝑠+ ShMem ⊆ISA
The system inclusion follows the three steps of §3.3 in order, the merging refinement, the threading
inclusion, and the certification inclusion. The threading and certification inclusion proceeds as the
overview describes and closes the chain to Theorem 1. We thus detail only the merging refinement.
The merging refinement eliminates the request transitions and the bookkeeping they carry.
Most importantly, the simulation ensures that the conditions under which the core made a request
still hold at response time. For example, it ensures that a requested load satisfies coherence. The
simulation also keeps 𝑓𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑟𝑒, 𝑝𝑐, and 𝑟𝑓of every equal, and mirrors each core’s lbag, sbag,
and pending to ShMem’s own bookkeeping of the requests it has yet to serve. In terms of actual
memory, the implementation coalesces the buffered writes to an address into a single memory write,
whereas TopMod performs one write per store, so TopMod’s memory has more writes. The two
memories thus agree observably, in that every load reads the same value and a store-conditional
succeeds in the implementation exactly when it succeeds in TopMod.
5
Modular Refinement with Preconditions
We design a lightweight encoding for extending a refinement framework with preconditions and
realize it in Fjfj. Our key idea is lifting the specification state to option. We review the per-method
proof obligation (§5.1), show why it admits no assumption on arguments (§5.2), and present our
encoding, comparing it with CCR (§5.3).
5.1
Background: Per-Method Proof Obligations
Fjfj reduces a refinement proof (§2.3) to one proof obligation per method and rule. Rules need
no precondition because they have no caller who could establish one, whereas methods do. We
therefore focus on the obligations arising during proofs of methods. A method’s specification is a
relation 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐(𝑎𝑟𝑔,𝑠𝑡,𝑠𝑡′,𝑟𝑒𝑡) over the argument, the pre- and post-states, and the return value. For
a simulation relation 𝜙, the proof obligation for a method is:
∀𝑎𝑟𝑔,𝑟𝑒𝑡,𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑡′
𝑖,𝑠𝑡𝑠. 𝜙(𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑡𝑠) →𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖(𝑎𝑟𝑔,𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑡′
𝑖,𝑟𝑒𝑡) →
∃𝑠𝑡′
𝑠. 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑠(𝑎𝑟𝑔,𝑠𝑡𝑠,𝑠𝑡′
𝑠,𝑟𝑒𝑡) ∧𝜙(𝑠𝑡′
𝑖,𝑠𝑡′
𝑠)
We need to show that if the initial states are related by 𝜙, and the implementation can take a step
satisfying 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖, the specification can take a corresponding step satisfying 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑠and preserves 𝜙.


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
23
5.2
Problem: Unconstrained Arguments
The proof obligation leaves no way to assume anything about a method’s arguments. Consider a
module whose state is a finite map 𝑠𝑡, with a method update(𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓) that applies 𝑓to the value at
𝑖𝑑𝑥(e.g., set_exec of Rob-Update) and returns unit. An ideal specification for update would be:
𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐update((𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓),𝑠𝑡,𝑠𝑡′, _) := ∃𝑣. 𝑠𝑡[𝑖𝑑𝑥] = 𝑣∧𝑠𝑡′ = 𝑠𝑡[𝑖𝑑𝑥↦→𝑓(𝑣)].
However, the simulation proof requires this specification even for an 𝑖𝑑𝑥outside the map’s domain,
where no such 𝑣exists.
The fix is to assume the missing precondition in the simulation proof, so that the obligation
carries it as a hypothesis:
𝜙(𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑡𝑠) →𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖((𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓),𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑡′
𝑖) →(∃𝑣. 𝑠𝑡𝑠[𝑖𝑑𝑥] = 𝑣) →
∃𝑠𝑡′
𝑠. 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐update((𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓),𝑠𝑡𝑠,𝑠𝑡′
𝑠, _) ∧𝜙(𝑠𝑡′
𝑖,𝑠𝑡′
𝑠)
A caller of update then owes a proof that the condition holds at its call site.
5.3
Solution: Lifting State to option
Our encoding provides a limited form of the precondition mechanism of CCR and its successors [15,
29, 30] by a lightweight encoding, leaving the underlying semantics untouched. CCR realizes
conditions as wrappers, where a violated precondition triggers undefined behavior in the semantics.
Our encoding instead makes the specification state vacuous, by dropping it to None. Their conditions
own separation-logic resources and transfer them between caller and callee, while ours is limited
to a pure predicate, which is what makes this simple encoding sufficient.
Guarded specifications. Our encoding separates a method specification into a precondition and a
postcondition. A guarded specification pairs the two, over an argument type 𝐴, a state type 𝑆𝑇, and
a return type 𝑅.
GSpec 𝐴𝑆𝑇𝑅:= { pre : 𝐴→𝑆𝑇→Prop;
post : 𝐴→𝑆𝑇→𝑆𝑇→𝑅→Prop }.
The guarded specification for update is given as follows:
gspecupdate := { pre((𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓),𝑠𝑡) := ∃𝑣. 𝑠𝑡[𝑖𝑑𝑥] = 𝑣;
post := 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐update }.
The figures of §4 render a guarded specification as a Hoare triple, pre as the premise and post as
the postcondition.
Lifting to option. We lift both the guarded specification and the simulation relation to option,
so a method call violating the precondition can simply update the internal state to None. A GSpec
becomes a method specification over option 𝑆𝑇as follows:
lift(𝑔𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐)(𝑎𝑟𝑔,𝑜𝑠𝑡,𝑜𝑠𝑡′,𝑟𝑒𝑡) :=∀𝑠𝑡. 𝑜𝑠𝑡= Some 𝑠𝑡→pre(𝑎𝑟𝑔,𝑠𝑡) →
∃𝑠𝑡′. 𝑜𝑠𝑡′ = Some 𝑠𝑡′ ∧post(𝑎𝑟𝑔,𝑠𝑡,𝑠𝑡′,𝑟𝑒𝑡)
The simulation relation 𝜙lifts alongside:
lift(𝜙) := 𝜆𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠. ∀𝑠𝑡𝑠. 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠= Some 𝑠𝑡𝑠→𝜙(𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑡𝑠).
Both lifted forms hold vacuously at None. A value method’s specification lifts the same way, its
postcondition relating the argument, the state, and the return value only.


24
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
Obtaining the precondition. We explain how we can obtain the precondition utilizing the guarded
specification. The obligation for update now runs over the lifted state:
∀(𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓),𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑡′
𝑖,𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠. 𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙((𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓),𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑡′
𝑖) →lift(𝜙)(𝑠𝑡𝑖,𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠) →
∃𝑜𝑠𝑡′
𝑠. lift(gspecupdate)((𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓),𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠,𝑜𝑠𝑡′
𝑠) ∧lift(𝜙)(𝑠𝑡′
𝑖,𝑜𝑠𝑡′
𝑠)
We perform case analysis on𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠and then on the validity of 𝑝𝑟𝑒. If𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠= None, choosing𝑜𝑠𝑡′
𝑠= None
trivially solves the obligation. If 𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠= Some 𝑠𝑡𝑠but 𝑝𝑟𝑒((𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓),𝑠𝑡𝑠) does not hold, the proof again
chooses 𝑜𝑠𝑡′
𝑠= None, which allows us to obtain the fact that 𝑝𝑟𝑒((𝑖𝑑𝑥, 𝑓),𝑠𝑡𝑠) does hold from
𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑡(𝑔𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐update), a contradiction. The remaining case is when the precondition holds, and the goal
simplifies to the ideal obligation of §5.2.
Soundness for free. We obtain preconditions at zero additional metatheory cost. The encoding
only wraps the specification state in option, so the existing soundness theorems apply unchanged.
6
Proof Mechanization
We report on the mechanization of the end-to-end refinement (§6.1) and our experience of proving
it with LLM agents (§6.2).
6.1
The Rocq Development
The end-to-end refinement of Theorem 1, from the multiprocessor implementation to ISA, is fully
mechanized in 64k LOC in Rocq. The implementation is unbounded in the sense of Table 1, and
Theorem 1 holds for all instantiations and for arbitrary execution lengths.
For productivity at this scale, we re-implemented Fjfj based on interaction trees [33] rather
than the original deeply embedded DSL. This lets us use plain Rocq functions and types in our
hardware design. The trusted computing base consists of the Rocq kernel, the semantics of our
Fjfj implementation, and primitive modules (register and higher-order vector module), and the
definitions involved in Theorem 1.
6.2
LLM Agents as the Proof Workhorse
Automation record. LLM agents wrote the large majority of the mechanized proofs. The agents
proved the core refinement (§4.7, one week), the system inclusion (§4.8, three weeks), and most
module refinements (rest of §4). Most module proofs finish in under a day, with the exception
of large modules such as the load–store queue, which took three days including planning. The
resulting proof scripts are much longer than those typically written by humans, which inflates the
LOC count.
Workflow. Humans conduct the proof design while agents conduct the proofs. We first draft the
implementation, specification, and invariant ideas in a planning document, and refine them with an
agent until the design is settled. The agent then writes the actual proof scripts, under the rule that it
never changes the implementation or specification on its own but consults us first. When a goal is
unprovable, the agent reports a concrete counterexample, which helps localize the flawed invariant,
specification, or implementation, for which the human provides concrete fixes or guidance on how
to proceed.
Hands-off system inclusion. The system inclusion pushed the delegation to near autonomy. We
gave the desired statement 𝑛· Core𝑠+ ShMem ⊆ISA, a few principled invariant designs, and the
proof scripts of Pulte et al. [24] as reference. The agent concretized the invariants into their full form
and proofs on its own, only coming back a few times with counterexamples due to specification or
invariant bugs.


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
25
Trusting the kernel for generated proofs. The Rocq kernel spares us the usual worry about
AI-generated code, that it cannot be trusted without review. Every proof the agent produces must
pass the kernel, so an accepted proof is correct regardless of how it was found. The same trust
extends to the agent’s own delegation, spawning helper agents whose proofs the main agent accepts
without reading.
7
Related and Future Work
We already described the closest works in §1. Here, we discuss the remaining related works.
Model checking processors. Modern hardware verification is dominated by model checking, which
fundamentally bounds their guarantees to fixed parameters. Burch and Dill [5] verified processor
control by flushing the pipeline into an architectural state. Successors reached realistic designs,
through compositional model checking of Tomasulo’s algorithm and richer microarchitectures [12,
19]. QED [25] scales furthest, reducing compliance to pairwise reorderings with single intervening
events, and verifies the load–store queue of the out-of-order BOOM core against the RISC-V memory
model for any program length and core count. The guarantee still covers one queue of a fixed size
and checks ordering predicates rather than functional refinement.
Foramlly verified processors. Existing verification for processors are limited to in-order processors
or SC semantics. Hosabettu et al. [11], Sawada and Hunt [28] verified an out-of-order design
with speculative execution, exceptions, and self-modifying code, but is limited to a single core.
Vijayaraghavan et al. [31] mechanized a out-of-order multiprocessor against an in-order one in Rocq.
However, the verified semantics performs in-order loads, which ultimately results in SC semantics.
Kôika [4] is a DSL modeling Bluespec’s scheduling semantics, and proves that the semantics
preserves one-rule-at-a-time semantics, along a proof of a in-order single core. PipeProof [18]
performs unbounded verification formulated as SAT instance, often requiring manual invariants.
Their approach does not scale well with instruction length, and only considers in-order processors.
Weak-memory semantics and its clients. Our work provides a new lower bound for existing liter-
ature on weak memory semantics. On hardware memory models, Alglave et al. [1] comprehensively
tested the processor behavior against axiomatic models, and is part of official ARM. Pulte et al. [23]
recast ARMv8’s memory model in an abstract microarchitectural style, simplifying the interaction
between individual cores and shared memory. Our core specification Core𝑠shares that philosophy
but is much simpler and more presice, as (1) they model instructions as trees, while ours is a single
list and is much easier for usage in verifications; (2) we can compute coherence violation in a
thread-local manner by comparing indexes, while theirs requires global anlaysis; and (3) ours has a
request–response interface, which requiring well-thought designs of required microarchitectural
states. Going more above, compiler correctness proofs [6, 16] bridge until software weak memory
models, and program logics [9, 22], and verification on top of them [13, 21], go to user-level libraries.
Putting our work below them, we have taken a solid step in creating a verification stack from user
libraries down to RTL for realistic efficient weak-memory multiprocessor.
Future work. We plan to extend our design to include features commonly found in out-of-order
processors, including register renaming, superscalar execution, and more microoptimizations found
in the RiscyOO design. While these optimizations do not increase the behavior the cores exhibit,
they are crucial for performance. We additionally plan to synthesize our design, and evaluate its
performance against unverified cores. Finally, it will be interesting to add more features to the core,
such as exceptions and virtualization, which will also require extending the ISA to include them.


26
Janggun Lee and Jeehoon Kang
References
[1] Jade Alglave, Luc Maranget, and Michael Tautschnig. 2014. Herding Cats: Modelling, Simulation, Testing, and
Data Mining for Weak Memory. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 36, 2 (2014), 7:1–7:74.
doi:10.1145/2627752
[2] Mark Batty, Scott Owens, Susmit Sarkar, Peter Sewell, and Tjark Weber. 2011. Mathematizing C++ Concurrency. In
Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (Austin,
Texas, USA) (POPL ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 55–66. doi:10.1145/1926385.1926394
[3] Thomas Bourgeat, Jiazheng Liu, Adam Chlipala, and Arvind. 2025. Making Concurrent Hardware Verification
Sequential. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9, PLDI, Article 228 (June 2025), 25 pages. doi:10.1145/3729331
[4] Thomas Bourgeat, Clément Pit-Claudel, Adam Chlipala, and Arvind. 2020. The essence of Bluespec: a core language
for rule-based hardware design. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation (London, UK) (PLDI 2020). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 243–257.
doi:10.1145/3385412.3385965
[5] Jerry R. Burch and David L. Dill. 1994. Automatic Verification of Pipelined Microprocessor Control. In Computer Aided
Verification, 6th International Conference, CAV ’94, Proceedings. Springer, 68–80. doi:10.1007/3-540-58179-0_44
[6] Minki Cho, Sung-Hwan Lee, Dongjae Lee, Chung-Kil Hur, and Ori Lahav. 2022. Sequential reasoning for optimizing
compilers under weak memory concurrency. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation (San Diego, CA, USA) (PLDI 2022). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 213–228. doi:10.1145/3519939.3523718
[7] Joonwon Choi, Jaewoo Kim, and Jeehoon Kang. 2025. Revamping Verilog Semantics for Foundational Verification.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9, OOPSLA2, Article 306 (Oct. 2025), 28 pages. doi:10.1145/3763084
[8] Joonwon Choi, Muralidaran Vijayaraghavan, Benjamin Sherman, Adam Chlipala, and Arvind. 2017. Kami: a platform
for high-level parametric hardware specification and its modular verification. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 1, ICFP,
Article 24 (Aug. 2017), 30 pages. doi:10.1145/3110268
[9] Hoang-Hai Dang, Jaehwang Jung, Jaemin Choi, Duc-Than Nguyen, William Mansky, Jeehoon Kang, and Derek Dreyer.
2022. Compass: strong and compositional library specifications in relaxed memory separation logic. In Proceedings of
the 43rd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (San Diego, CA,
USA) (PLDI 2022). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 792–808. doi:10.1145/3519939.3523451
[10] Maurice Herlihy and Nir Shavit. 2011. On the Nature of Progress. In Principles of Distributed Systems, Antonio
Fernàndez Anta, Giuseppe Lipari, and Matthieu Roy (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 313–328.
[11] Ravi Hosabettu, Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, and Mandayam K. Srivas. 2003. Formal Verification of a Complex Pipelined
Processor. Formal Methods in System Design 23, 2 (2003), 171–213. doi:10.1023/A:1024716316140
[12] Ranjit Jhala and Kenneth L. McMillan. 2001. Microarchitecture Verification by Compositional Model Checking. In
Computer Aided Verification, 13th International Conference, CAV 2001, Proceedings. Springer, 396–410. doi:10.1007/3-
540-44585-4_40
[13] Jaehwang Jung, Sunho Park, Janggun Lee, Jeho Yeon, and Jeehoon Kang. 2025. Verifying General-Purpose RCU for
Reclamation in Relaxed Memory Separation Logic. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9, PLDI, Article 147 (June 2025), 25 pages.
doi:10.1145/3729246
[14] Jeehoon Kang, Chung-Kil Hur, Ori Lahav, Viktor Vafeiadis, and Derek Dreyer. 2017. A Promising Semantics for
Relaxed-Memory Concurrency. SIGPLAN Not. 52, 1 (jan 2017), 175–189. doi:10.1145/3093333.3009850
[15] Yonghee Kim, Taeyoung Yoon, Sanghyun Yi, Jaehyung Lee, Soonwon Moon, Yeji Han, Seonho Lee, Taeyoung Rhee,
Yujin Im, Donghyun Nam, Jieung Kim, and Chung-Kil Hur. 2026. CRIS: The Power of Imagination in Hybrid Verification.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 10, PLDI, Article 239 (June 2026), 24 pages. doi:10.1145/3808317
[16] Sung-Hwan Lee, Minki Cho, Roy Margalit, Chung-Kil Hur, and Ori Lahav. 2023. Putting Weak Memory in Order
via a Promising Intermediate Representation. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7, PLDI, Article 183 (June 2023), 24 pages.
doi:10.1145/3591297
[17] Sung-Hwan Lee, Minki Cho, Anton Podkopaev, Soham Chakraborty, Chung-Kil Hur, Ori Lahav, and Viktor Vafeiadis.
2020. Promising 2.0: global optimizations in relaxed memory concurrency. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (London, UK) (PLDI 2020). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 362–376. doi:10.1145/3385412.3386010
[18] Yatin A. Manerkar, Daniel Lustig, Margaret Martonosi, and Aarti Gupta. 2018. PipeProof: Automated Memory
Consistency Proofs for Microarchitectural Specifications. In 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture, MICRO 2018. IEEE Computer Society, 788–801. doi:10.1109/MICRO.2018.00069
[19] Kenneth L. McMillan. 1998. Verification of an Implementation of Tomasulo’s Algorithm by Compositional Model
Checking. In Computer Aided Verification, 10th International Conference, CAV ’98, Proceedings. Springer, 110–121.
doi:10.1007/BFb0028738


Formal Verification of an Out-of-Order Multiprocessor against an In-Order Weak-Memory ISA
27
[20] Rishiyur S. Nikhil. 2004. Bluespec System Verilog: efficient, correct RTL from high level specifications. Proceedings.
Second ACM and IEEE International Conference on Formal Methods and Models for Co-Design, 2004. MEMOCODE ’04.
(2004), 69–70. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5196158
[21] Sunho Park, Jaehwang Jung, Janggun Lee, and Jeehoon Kang. 2025. Verifying Lock-Free Traversals in Relaxed Memory
Separation Logic. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9, PLDI, Article 149 (June 2025), 25 pages. doi:10.1145/3729248
[22] Sunho Park, Jaewoo Kim, Ike Mulder, Jaehwang Jung, Janggun Lee, Robbert Krebbers, and Jeehoon Kang. 2024. A
Proof Recipe for Linearizability in Relaxed Memory Separation Logic. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 8, PLDI, Article 154
(June 2024), 24 pages. doi:10.1145/3656384
[23] Christopher Pulte, Shaked Flur, Will Deacon, Jon French, Susmit Sarkar, and Peter Sewell. 2017. Simplifying ARM
concurrency: multicopy-atomic axiomatic and operational models for ARMv8. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2, POPL,
Article 19 (Dec. 2017), 29 pages. doi:10.1145/3158107
[24] Christopher Pulte, Jean Pichon-Pharabod, Jeehoon Kang, Sung-Hwan Lee, and Chung-Kil Hur. 2019. Promising-
ARM/RISC-V: A Simpler and Faster Operational Concurrency Model. In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Phoenix, AZ, USA) (PLDI 2019). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. doi:10.1145/3314221.3314624
[25] Gokulan Ravi, Xiaokang Qiu, Mithuna Thottethodi, and T. N. Vijaykumar. 2026. QED: Scalable Consistency Verification
of Memory Instruction Reordering in Hardware. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture.
[26] Alastair Reid, Rick Chen, Anastasios Deligiannis, David Gilday, David Hoyes, Will Keen, Ashan Pathirane, Owen
Shepherd, Peter Vrabel, and Ali Zaidi. 2016. End-to-End Verification of Processors with ISA-Formal. In Computer
Aided Verification, Swarat Chaudhuri and Azadeh Farzan (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 42–58.
[27] Susmit Sarkar, Peter Sewell, Jade Alglave, Luc Maranget, and Derek Williams. 2011. Understanding POWER multipro-
cessors. SIGPLAN Not. 46, 6 (June 2011), 175–186. doi:10.1145/1993316.1993520
[28] Jun Sawada and Warren A. Hunt, Jr. 2002. Verification of FM9801: An Out-of-Order Microprocessor Model with
Speculative Execution, Exceptions, and Program-Modifying Capability. Formal Methods in System Design 20, 2 (2002),
187–222. doi:10.1023/A:1014122630277
[29] Youngju Song and Minki Cho. 2025.
CCR 2.0: High-level Reasoning for Conditional Refinements.
arXiv:2507.04298 [cs.PL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.04298
[30] Youngju Song, Minki Cho, Dongjae Lee, Chung-Kil Hur, Michael Sammler, and Derek Dreyer. 2023. Conditional
Contextual Refinement. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 7, POPL, Article 39 (Jan. 2023), 31 pages. doi:10.1145/3571232
[31] Muralidaran Vijayaraghavan, Adam Chlipala, Arvind, and Nirav Dave. 2015. Modular Deductive Verification of
Multiprocessor Hardware Designs. In Computer Aided Verification - 27th International Conference, CAV 2015, Proceedings,
Part II. Springer, 109–127. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21668-3_7
[32] Wikipedia contributors. 2023. ABA problem — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?title=ABA_problem&oldid=1166964304. [Online; accessed 4-August-2023].
[33] Li-yao Xia, Yannick Zakowski, Paul He, Chung-Kil Hur, Gregory Malecha, Benjamin C. Pierce, and Steve Zdancewic.
2019. Interaction trees: representing recursive and impure programs in Coq. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4, POPL,
Article 51 (Dec. 2019), 32 pages. doi:10.1145/3371119
[34] Sizhuo Zhang, Andrew Wright, Thomas Bourgeat, and Arvind. 2018. Composable building blocks to open up processor
design. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (Fukuoka, Japan)
(MICRO-51). IEEE Press, 68–81. doi:10.1109/MICRO.2018.00015
