FEEDBACK MAKES PERFECT: A CLOSED-LOOP
FRAMEWORK FOR NL-TO-STL TRANSLATION
Bowen Ye
Xiang Yin
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
{yebowen1025,yinxiang}@sjtu.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Signal Temporal Logic (STL) enables rigorous verification and control of cyber-
physical systems, but writing correct specifications requires expertise that most
requirement holders lack. Large language models can translate natural-language
(NL) requirements into STL, yet stronger translators alone approach an accuracy
ceiling. We argue that this ceiling stems from how the task is posed: one-shot,
open-loop translation is somewhat ill-defined. Natural language is ambiguous,
and, more fundamentally, what a person writes may not always be what they in-
tend, so the target specification is not fully contained in the input text. We there-
fore reformulate NL-to-STL translation as a closed-loop feedback process. Each
generated formula is translated back into natural language for the user to check,
and natural-language corrections drive revision until the user accepts the speci-
fication. Users never read or write formal syntax. This framework rests on an
asymmetry familiar from feedback control theory. The forward path, from am-
biguous language to formal logic, is hard and error-prone. The feedback path,
from structured STL back to language, can be made highly precise, and a precise
feedback path lets an imprecise forward path achieve precise closed-loop behav-
ior. Experiments on 500 expert-authored requirements and seven LLMs support
this view. Back-translated explanations agree with expert judgments in 99.5% of
cases. Closed-loop refinement raises strong models from about 89% open-loop
accuracy to 98.0–99.2%, and yields gains of over 30 percentage points for weaker
models (e.g., 17.6%→48.0%). Ablations show these gains come from the seman-
tic content of the feedback rather than from repeated attempts. An expert audit
and a 280-session user study further confirm the reliability of the loop. We also
identify a capability threshold above which feedback no longer helps.
1
INTRODUCTION
Formal specifications provide a foundation for trustworthy autonomous systems by enabling rigor-
ous verification, runtime monitoring, and controller synthesis. In safety-critical cyber-physical sys-
tems, Signal Temporal Logic (STL) offers a precise formalism for expressing temporal behaviors
over real-valued signals, including safety constraints, response requirements, and complex temporal
objectives (Alur, 2015; Maler & Nickovic, 2004). Such specifications have been widely adopted in
autonomous driving (Arechiga, 2019; Mehdipour et al., 2023), robotics (Silano et al., 2021), and
formal controller synthesis (Belta & Sadraddini, 2019; Yin et al., 2024). Writing them, however,
remains an expert task. A correct STL formula requires fluency in temporal operators, interval
semantics, and quantitative predicates. The domain engineers and end users who actually hold
the requirements rarely have this expertise. Formal guarantees are therefore only as reliable as the
translation from what a person wants to what the formula states, and this translation has traditionally
depended on a small pool of specialists.
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) offer a way around this bottleneck by translat-
ing natural-language requirements directly into temporal logic. Substantial progress has been made
through dedicated datasets and translation models (He et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Mao et al.,
2024), external knowledge augmentation (Fang et al., 2025a), reinforcement learning with task-
specific rewards (Fang et al., 2026b), and tool-assisted reasoning (Mendoza et al., 2024; Ye et al.,
1
arXiv:2609.33287v1  [cs.AI]  27 Sep 2026


Open-Loop Translation
Drive to the pickup zone, 
keep a safe distance from 
pedestrians and never 
enter the crosswalk when 
the light is red
User
NL2STL
Generated STL / Controller
•
G (d_pred < d_safe)
•
G (red -> not_enter_crosswalk)
•
F (reach_goal)
•
……
Execute
directly
Possible misinterpretation,
unsafe behavior!
Too close
Figure 1: One-shot translation.
2026). Most of these advances strengthen the translator itself. Yet stronger translators alone appear
to approach a ceiling. In our experiments, frontier-scale models plateau at roughly 89% one-shot
accuracy, and a newer model generation yields no further gain. We argue that this ceiling reflects
how the task is posed rather than a lack of model capability. One-shot, open-loop translation is ill-
defined for two reasons. First, natural language is inherently ambiguous. A requirement can admit
several formalizations, and without further information no translator can reliably select the intended
one. Second, and more fundamentally, the words a person writes may not be the intent they hold.
Requirements routinely omit thresholds, leave triggering conditions implicit, or compress tempo-
ral scope, and their authors would immediately correct these gaps upon seeing the consequences.
The target of translation is therefore not fully contained in the input text. No amount of translator
capability can recover information that was never written down.
Human collaboration offers a familiar resolution. When a supervisor assigns a task, a capable engi-
neer does not act on a first reading. Instead, they restate their understanding, have it confirmed
or corrected, and proceed only once the two agree. Requirement clarification methods (Cosler
et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2025b) capture part of this exchange by resolving ambiguity in the in-
put before translation. However, they cannot detect a well-posed requirement that has been trans-
lated into a formula that says something else. Following this observation, we formulate NL-to-
STL translation as a closed-loop feedback process rather than a one-shot task (Fig. 1). Each
generated formula is rendered back into natural language and checked against the author’s in-
tent.
If it does not match, it is revised using natural-language corrections, yielding the cycle
“Generate →Explain →Check →Feedback →Revise”. Users interact only in natural language,
and STL formulas remain entirely in the machine layer.
This formulation brings a classical insight from feedback control theory to specification synthesis:
a precise feedback path can make an imprecise forward path yield precise closed-loop behavior.
In a negative-feedback amplifier, the closed-loop gain is set by the feedback network and becomes
largely insensitive to variations in the forward gain. Our framework shares this structure. The for-
ward path, from natural language to STL, is hard and error-prone because it must map complex, often
underspecified human intentions into a structured formalism. The feedback path, from STL back to
natural language, is far easier. It starts from a structured, unambiguous artifact whose predicates,
thresholds, intervals, and logical dependencies can be read off directly and rendered faithfully. This
asymmetry is the key to our approach: we do not need a perfect translator, only a precise observer
of what the translator produced. Empirically, back-translated explanations agree with expert judg-
ments in 99.5% of cases, compared with at most 94.4% for direct NL–STL comparison. With this
feedback in place, closed-loop accuracy rises to 98.0–99.2% for strong models. The largest gains
appear for weaker models: Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct improves from 45.2% to 76.0%, and Qwen2.5-3B-
Instruct from 17.6% to 48.0%. As in control, the loop also has limits. A forward path too weak
to act on corrections cannot be rescued by feedback alone, as with Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct, which
improves only from 6.8% to 7.8%. This result marks when closed-loop refinement is effective.
We evaluate the framework on 500 expert-authored requirements spanning four application domains
and a nested-specification subset, using seven LLMs ranging from 0.5B parameters to frontier scale.
Beyond accuracy, we examine why feedback helps: replacing semantic feedback with an uninfor-
mative retry instruction removes most of the gain. We also examine whether the loop can be trusted,
through an expert audit of accepted specifications and a user study comprising 280 interactive ses-
sions.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: (i) We show that open-loop NL-to-STL translation
is somehow ill-posed, because requirements are ambiguous and the written requirement need not
match its author’s intent. We reformulate the task as closed-loop feedback between human intent
and formal specification. (ii) We develop a closed-loop framework whose feedback path exploits the
structure of STL to render generated formulas precisely in natural language. This allows non-experts
2


to validate and correct specifications without reading formal syntax. (iii) Through experiments on
seven LLMs, feedback ablations, an expert audit, and a user study, we show that a precise feedback
path substantially reduces dependence on translator capability. We also characterize the capability
threshold above which feedback no longer helps.
2
RELATED WORK
Natural-Language-to-Temporal-Logic Translation. Natural-language-to-temporal-logic transla-
tion requires preserving logical structure and temporal semantics across linguistic and formal rep-
resentations. Research on LTL and related logics investigates LLM-based translation (Chen et al.,
2023), NL-to-LTL tools (Fuggitti & Chakraborti, 2023), data-efficient learning (Pan et al., 2023),
and grounding robot instructions in temporal specifications (Liu et al., 2023). STL introduces addi-
tional requirements for real-valued predicates, numerical thresholds, and metric temporal intervals.
DeepSTL studies supervised English-to-STL translation using grammar-generated training data (He
et al., 2022). Subsequent methods incorporate LLM-based generation (Mao et al., 2024), external
knowledge augmentation (Fang et al., 2025a), and multi-aspect reinforcement learning (Fang et al.,
2026b). ReasonSTL integrates deterministic numerical tools with structured formula construction
to support semantic and numerical fidelity (Ye et al., 2026). These approaches primarily improve
the translator’s ability to recover a formal specification from a supplied requirement. Our work
examines how generated specifications can be assessed against user intent when the supplied re-
quirement may itself need revision. We study translation across successive requirement revisions,
treating translator accuracy and intent alignment as distinct objectives. Advances in the underlying
translation model therefore complement the protocol studied here.
Interactive Requirement Clarification and Specification Refinement. A related direction in-
vestigates interactive approaches for improving the reliability of language-based formalization.
NL2Spec Cosler et al. (2023) introduces an interactive framework for translating natural-language
descriptions into temporal logic specifications by allowing users to refine intermediate natural-
language descriptions associated with logical components. However, the interaction is performed at
the level of temporal-logic fragments and requires users to reason about formal structures. In con-
trast, our setting considers users who provide domain-level requirements without requiring expertise
in temporal logic and focuses on validating the semantic meaning of a complete generated specifi-
cation. More recently, ClarifySTL Fang et al. (2025b; 2026a) studies requirement clarification for
STL transformation by identifying ambiguities and acquiring additional information before trans-
lation. Such approaches improve the specification input by resolving underspecified requirements.
However, input clarification and output validation address different stages of the synthesis pipeline:
a well-defined requirement may still be translated into an incorrect STL formula. Our work comple-
ments these approaches by introducing feedback after formal specification generation to verify and
correct the realized semantics of the generated artifact.
Reliability Assessment and Feedback-based Refinement of LLM Outputs. Beyond formal spec-
ification synthesis, recent studies have investigated improving the reliability of LLM outputs through
evaluation and iterative refinement. Self-Refine Madaan et al. (2023) explores iterative generation
with self-feedback, while CRITIC Gou et al. (2024) introduces tool-interactive critique for improv-
ing model responses. Verification-oriented methods, including process-level supervision and step-
wise verification Lightman et al. (2024), demonstrate the effectiveness of external evaluation signals
for improving reasoning reliability. In addition, SCP-NL2TL Wang et al. (2026) investigates selec-
tive prediction and semantic verification to identify unreliable temporal-logic translations. However,
existing feedback and verification approaches primarily aim to improve output quality or estimate
confidence, rather than establishing semantic agreement between a generated formal artifact and
the original human intent. In formal specification synthesis, the correctness criterion is not merely
whether an output is plausible or verifiable, but whether it preserves the intended meaning of the
requirement.
Our work builds upon these directions by introducing a closed-loop semantic acceptance process for
NL-to-STL translation. The proposed framework places feedback after specification generation and
before downstream formal reasoning, enabling generated specifications to be validated and refined
according to their intended semantics. Rather than replacing existing translation or verification tech-
3


niques, our approach provides an additional alignment layer that connects human intent, generated
formal specifications, and subsequent formal analysis.
3
PRELIMINARIES
3.1
SIGNAL TEMPORAL LOGIC
Signal Temporal Logic (STL) is a formal specification language for real-valued signals in cyber-
physical systems. Let v : [0, T] →Rd denote a signal trajectory. STL formulas are constructed
from real-valued predicates, Boolean connectives, and temporal operators. The syntax is defined
recursively as
ϕ ::= π | ¬ϕ | ϕ1 ∧ϕ2 | ϕ1 ∨ϕ2 | ϕ1 →ϕ2 | GIϕ | FIϕ | ϕ1UIϕ2,
π ::= f(x1, . . . , xk) ∼c,
(1)
where f(x1, . . . , xk) is a real-valued signal expression, ∼∈{<, ≤, =, ≥, >}, c ∈R, and I = [a, b]
is a temporal interval with 0 ≤a ≤b ≤∞. The operators GI, FI, and UI denote the globally,
eventually, and until operators, respectively.
The satisfaction relation (v, t) |= ϕ defines whether a signal trajectory satisfies an STL formula at
time t. For a predicate,
(v, t) |= f(x1, . . . , xk) ∼c
(2)
if and only if the predicate evaluates to true at time t. The temporal operators are interpreted over
the associated interval. Specifically,
(v, t) |= G[a,b]ϕ ⇐⇒∀t′ ∈[t + a, t + b], (v, t′) |= ϕ,
(v, t) |= F[a,b]ϕ ⇐⇒∃t′ ∈[t + a, t + b], (v, t′) |= ϕ,
(v, t) |= ϕ1U[a,b]ϕ2 ⇐⇒∃t′ ∈[t + a, t + b],
(3)
where (v, t′) |= ϕ2 and (v, τ) |= ϕ1 for all τ ∈[t, t′]. STL additionally admits quantitative robust-
ness semantics, which assigns a real-valued measure indicating the degree of satisfaction or violation
of a specification.
Throughout this work, we consider the future-time fragment of STL with explicit temporal intervals.
All temporal operators are associated with bounded or explicitly specified intervals, with unbounded
requirements represented as [0, ∞). STL formulas are represented internally as structured syntax
trees for subsequent processing.
3.2
NL-TO-STL TRANSLATION
We consider the task of translating a natural-language requirement into an STL specification. Let I
denote the underlying human intent, x denote its natural-language expression, and ϕ denote the gen-
erated STL formula. An NL-to-STL translator aims to synthesize a specification whose semantics
faithfully represents the intended requirement:
sem(ϕ) ≡I,
(4)
where sem(ϕ) denotes the behavior characterized by the generated STL formula. This formula-
tion distinguishes three different objects involved in specification synthesis: the latent intent of the
requirement, its linguistic description, and the resulting formal representation.
The correctness of NL-to-STL translation is therefore determined by semantic alignment rather than
syntactic similarity. Exact matching between a generated formula and a reference specification is
insufficient, since semantically equivalent STL formulas may have different syntactic structures. On
the other hand, determining semantic equivalence between arbitrary STL formulas is challenging
due to the combination of real-valued predicates, temporal intervals, and nested temporal operators.
Consequently, verifying whether a generated specification faithfully preserves the intended meaning
remains a fundamental challenge.
Moreover, natural-language requirements may themselves be insufficient to determine a unique for-
mal specification. For example, requirements may omit quantitative thresholds, temporal bounds, or
4


User
Specify · Verify
Human Intent xt
( Model-agnostic )
STL  𝜑!
Backward
Translator
NL Restatament 𝑥ˆ!
User
Specify · Verify
Past Content ht-1
Forward Translator
Content ht
( Model-agnostic )
STL  𝜑!"#
Backward
Translator
Forward Translator
Content ht+1
Human Intent xt+1
User
Specify · Verify
Accept
Final Specification
(downstream use)
Task Execution
Interchangeable
Component 
Forward path
Backward path
Reject
Restate
Human Intent Space
(domain knowledge, task intent, NL-based)
Machine World
(formal representation, execution, …)
t-th iteration
(t+1)-th iteration
Same User
Same User
NL Restatament 𝑥ˆ!"#
Content ht
Figure 2: Closed-loop semantic acceptance for NL-to-STL translation.
triggering conditions required for constructing a complete STL formula. In such cases, additional as-
sumptions are necessary to obtain a specification, and the resulting formula may reflect assumptions
introduced by the translator rather than information contained in the original requirement. There-
fore, reliable NL-to-STL translation requires distinguishing between ambiguity originating from the
requirement and semantic deviations introduced during formalization.
4
CLOSED-LOOP SEMANTIC ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK
Natural-language requirements may be incomplete at the outset, while their translation into STL
may introduce additional semantic deviations. We address both sources of uncertainty through a
recurrent interaction between the framework and a single user. At round t, the user supplies a natural-
language utterance xt. The initial requirement is x0; subsequent utterances may clarify missing
details, correct a misinterpretation, or extend the requirement. Each utterance is incorporated into the
interaction context before a new candidate specification is generated. The resulting specification is
then rendered in natural language and presented to the user for verification, as illustrated in Figure 2.
4.1
ITERATIVE CONTEXT UPDATE AND SEMANTIC OBSERVATION
Let ht denote the compressed interaction context at round t. The framework updates this context
using the current user utterance and the artifacts from the preceding round, translates the updated
context into a candidate STL specification, and renders that specification back into natural language:
ht = C(ht−1, xt, φt−1, ˆxt−1),
φt = F(ht),
ˆxt = B(φt).
(5)
Here, C is the context update operator, F is the forward NL-to-STL translator, and B is the backward
STL-to-NL translator. The preceding context and artifacts are empty at t = 0. Consequently, the
initial requirement and all later revisions are processed by the same update rule.
The backward translation ˆxt, referred to as NL feedback, is a natural-language restatement of the
semantics represented by φt. It is derived from the candidate specification rather than from the user’s
presumed intention. To support meaningful verification, the restatement must reflect the predicates,
quantitative parameters, temporal intervals, and logical relationships expressed in the STL formula.
In particular, formal details such as thresholds and time bounds should be obtained from φt, rather
than inferred independently during backward translation. The resulting NL feedback provides a
user-facing view of the candidate specification without requiring the user to inspect STL syntax.
4.2
USER VERIFICATION AND REQUIREMENT REFINEMENT
The user evaluates whether ˆxt is consistent with their current intent and provides a decision at ∈
{accept, revise}. If the candidate is accepted, φt is returned as the final specification. Otherwise,
the user supplies a new utterance xt+1 after reviewing the NL feedback.
5


Algorithm 1 Closed-loop semantic acceptance for NL-to-STL translation
Require: Initial user utterance x0, maximum number of rounds K
1: Initialize h−1 ←∅, φ−1 ←∅, ˆx−1 ←∅
2: for t = 0, . . . , K −1 do
3:
Update context: ht ←C(ht−1, xt, φt−1, ˆxt−1)
4:
Generate candidate STL: φt ←F(ht)
5:
Generate NL feedback: ˆxt ←B(φt)
6:
Present ˆxt and obtain the user’s decision at ∈{accept, revise}
7:
if at = accept then
8:
return φt
9:
end if
10:
if t < K −1 then
11:
Obtain the user’s next utterance xt+1
12:
end if
13: end for
14: return unresolved
A revision may address different sources of mismatch. When the requirement is underspecified,
xt+1 can supply information needed to determine the intended STL semantics, such as a threshold,
temporal bound, or triggering condition. When the requirement is sufficiently specified but its trans-
lation is inaccurate, xt+1 can correct the deviation revealed by ˆxt. The user may also introduce an
additional constraint. These cases do not require separate interaction paths: each new utterance is
incorporated into the context through Eq. equation 5 before the next candidate is generated.
Acceptance is based on the user’s assessment of the displayed NL feedback. Its interpretation there-
fore depends on the fidelity of the backward translation; user acceptance alone does not constitute a
formal proof that φt is equivalent to the intended requirement.
4.3
CLOSED-LOOP ACCEPTANCE PROTOCOL
The protocol alternates between context update, forward translation, backward translation, and user
verification. When the user requests a revision, the next utterance is informed by the preceding NL
feedback, while the context update retains information from earlier rounds. This recurrent structure
permits both clarification of incomplete requirements and correction of translation errors within a
single procedure. Algorithm 1 summarizes the protocol.
The protocol terminates when the user accepts a candidate specification or when the round budget
is exhausted. By placing user verification between candidate generation and specification delivery,
the framework can resolve missing requirements and semantic deviations before the formal artifact
is used for downstream reasoning. To make this interaction concrete, we next present two repre-
sentative execution traces from our evaluation. The first shows a successful correction after user
feedback, while the second shows an unresolved case after the full ten-round budget. Both cases use
Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct as the forward translator.
Successful local repair. The user utterance is “The projector blackout blind must remain closed
for the next 5 minutes.” The first-round candidate is φ0 = F[0,300]blind closed, whose back-
translation reads “the blind is closed at some point within the next 300 seconds.” The gap is visible
at the natural-language layer: the candidate asserts a single instant of closure, while the user requires
closure over the entire window. The user issues REVISE with “the blind must stay closed throughout
the next 5 minutes; being closed at one instant is not enough.” Conditioned on this feedback, the
translator emits φ1 = G[0,300]blind closed, whose back-translation confirms invariance over
[0, 300]. The user issues ACCEPT, and the protocol returns φ1 after two rounds. The feedback
localizes a single operator substitution, from the eventuality operator F to the invariance operator
G, which is sufficient for acceptance.
Unresolved compositional repair. The second utterance couples four ordered constraints: the robot
stays stationary in a room during the first 15 minutes after 7:00 AM, picks up food between 7:15
and 7:20 AM, delivers it within 2 minutes of pickup, and holds speed below 2 m/s throughout the
6


operation. Normalizing 7:00 AM to t = 0, the intended semantics is
φ⋆= G[0,900](in room ∧speed = 0) ∧F[900,1200]epick
∧G[900,1200]
 epick →F[0,120]delivered

∧G[0,1320](speed < 2),
where epick is a one-time pickup event and the final bound spans the longest admissible operation,
with pickup at t = 1200 followed by the 2-minute delivery deadline.
The first-round candidate is φ0 = F[0,15](robot moving = 0). It exhibits three independent er-
rors: an eventuality operator in place of an invariance operator, a unit error that reads 15 minutes as
15 seconds, and the omission of the pickup, delivery, and speed constraints. The user issues REVISE
and restates all four requirements, with the continuous stationarity window, the pickup deadline, the
pickup-triggered delivery bound, and the operation-wide speed limit. By round 4 the translator re-
pairs the first constraint and emits G[0,900]stationary in room, whose back-translation reports
stationarity over the first 900 seconds. The remaining three constraints stay absent. Each subsequent
user decision is REVISE and re-specifies the same missing structure, yet rounds 4 through 10 repro-
duce the identical candidate. The tenth-round formula still contains no pickup event, no triggered
delivery deadline, and no speed bound, so the protocol returns unresolved once the budget K = 10
is spent. The trace isolates a compositional repair failure: back-translation exposes every missing
conjunct and the user supplies targeted feedback, but the translator converges to a single corrected
clause without recovering the full temporal composition.
5
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate the proposed closed-loop semantic acceptance framework from three aspects: (1) its
effectiveness in improving NL-to-STL translation over one-shot generation; (2) the impact of dif-
ferent feedback components and model capabilities on iterative refinement; and (3) the reliability of
the acceptance loop through human evaluation and robustness analysis.
5.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Benchmark and Models. We evaluate all models on a benchmark comprising 500 expert-authored
natural-language requirements from four application domains: autonomous driving, AGVs, drones,
and smart homes, together with a dedicated subset of nested temporal specifications. The bench-
mark was constructed by five domain experts and contains 335 well-specified requirements, 122
STL translation error cases, and 43 underspecified requirements. The 500 requirements were ran-
domly sampled from the collected instances using a fixed random seed. Details of the benchmark
construction process and annotation protocol are provided in the Appendix.
We evaluate seven LLMs spanning a broad range of model scales:
Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct,
Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct, Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, Qwen3.8-27B, Qwen3.6-Flash, Qwen3.7-Max, and
Qwen3.8-Max. The open-loop setting performs one-shot NL-to-STL translation without refinement,
whereas the closed-loop setting enables iterative semantic refinement with a maximum interaction
budget of 10 rounds.
Evaluation Protocol. Except in experiments explicitly designated as human-in-the-loop, closed-
loop evaluation uses an LLM-as-Judge to provide semantic acceptance decisions and, upon rejection,
simulated follow-up NL inputs. A feedback event is a noninitial NL input xt (t ≥1) that clarifies
or corrects the requirement; thus, a run accepted in the first round has zero feedback events. We
report open-loop semantic accuracy, closed-loop convergence rate, feedback frequency, interaction
cost, and performance across refinement budgets. A run converges only if its STL specification is
accepted within the prescribed budget. The acceptance mechanism is assessed through expert review
and controlled perturbation experiments, with implementation details in Appendix.
5.2
SEMANTIC FEEDBACK IMPROVES SPECIFICATION FIDELITY
We compare one-shot NL-to-STL translation with closed-loop refinement to assess changes in se-
mantic accuracy and interaction cost. Table 1 reports the results across seven models. For the
benchmark-scale evaluation, an automated semantic acceptance module supplies acceptance deci-
sions and follow-up NL inputs. Its agreement with human assessments is examined in Section 5.4.
7


Table 1: Comparison between open-loop translation and closed-loop semantic refinement. Gain is reported in
percentage points (pp).
Model
Open-loop Acc↑
Closed-loop Acc↑
Gain (pp)↑
Feedback/sample↓
Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct
6.8%
7.8%
+1.0
8.34
Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
17.6%
48.0%
+30.4
5.34
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
45.2%
76.0%
+30.8
2.83
Qwen3.8-27B
86.4%
98.0%
+11.6
0.41
Qwen3.6-Flash
81.4%
99.0%
+17.6
0.32
Qwen3.7-Max
89.0%
99.2%
+10.2
0.20
Qwen3.8-Max
88.6%
99.2%
+10.6
0.19
Closed-loop accuracy exceeds open-loop accuracy for every evaluated model, with gains ranging
from 1.0 to 30.8 percentage points. The largest gains are observed for Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct and
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, which improve by 30.4 and 30.8 percentage points, respectively. These gains
require an average of 5.34 and 2.83 additional NL inputs per sample, indicating that the accuracy
improvement for these models entails substantial interaction.
The response to feedback is strongly model-dependent. Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct reaches only 7.8%
closed-loop accuracy, an increase of 1.0 percentage point despite 8.34 feedback events per sample.
This pattern is consistent with limited capacity to incorporate corrective information and shows that
additional refinement rounds do not uniformly yield meaningful gains.
For the four higher-performing models, closed-loop accuracy reaches 98.0–99.2%, while mean feed-
back remains below 0.5 events per sample. Their improvements range from 10.2 to 17.6 percentage
points despite open-loop accuracies above 80%. Qwen3.7-Max has the highest open-loop accuracy
(89.0%) and reaches 99.2% after refinement. Qwen3.8-Max reaches the same closed-loop accuracy
with the lowest mean feedback count (0.19 per sample). These results characterize the measured
gains and their interaction costs under the automated acceptance protocol; Section 5.4 evaluates the
reliability of the acceptance decisions on which the protocol depends.
5.3
UNDERSTANDING THE ROLE OF SEMANTIC FEEDBACK
We examine whether closed-loop gains arise from the semantic content of feedback rather than
repeated generation, and how models use feedback across successive refinement rounds.
(a) Feedback ablation
Model
I
U
∆
Qwen2.5-3B
44.0%
17.5%
+26.5
Qwen2.5-7B
76.0%
50.0%
+26.0
Qwen3.8-27B
98.0%
88.0%
+10.0
Qwen3.8-Max
99.5%
89.9%
+9.6
(b) Interaction dynamics
1
2
3
5
10
Forward times
0
20
40
60
80
100
Accuracy (%)
2.5-0.5B
2.5-3B
2.5-7B
3.8-27B
3.6-Flash
3.7-Max
3.8-Max
Figure 3: Feedback ablation and convergence. I/U: in-
formative/uninformative feedback; ∆: accuracy differ-
ence in percentage points. All models are Qwen mod-
els.
To assess whether the gains arise from se-
mantic guidance rather than repeated genera-
tion, we replace each corrective input with a
generic retry instruction. This instruction tells
the model that its previous specification is in-
correct and asks it to try again, but does not
identify the erroneous predicate, temporal oper-
ator, interval, or omitted constraint. The model
and refinement procedure remain unchanged,
so both conditions allow further translation at-
tempts; only the informative condition pro-
vides a specific direction for correction. Fig-
ure 3(a) shows that informative feedback yields
higher accuracy for all four evaluated models,
with differences of 9.6–26.5 percentage points.
The largest differences occur for Qwen2.5-3B-
Instruct and Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, at 26.5 and
26.0 percentage points, respectively. These re-
sults support the conclusion that the semantic
content of feedback contributes to refinement
beyond a rejection signal and another genera-
tion opportunity.
Figure 3(b) examines the distribution of gains
across interaction rounds. Higher-capability models approach their final performance within the first
few rounds, whereas weaker models benefit less from continued refinement. In particular, Qwen2.5-
8


Table 2: Automated acceptance reliability and real-user evaluation. D1: direct NL–STL with DeepSeek-v4-
Flash; D2: direct NL–STL with Qwen3.6-27B; B3: three-model back-translation.
(a) Acceptance reliability
Evaluation
Method or metric
Result
Calibration
D1
92.8%
D2
94.4%
B3
398/400 (99.5%)
Human audit
Acceptance precision
629/634 (99.2%)
Wilson 95% CI
[98.2%, 99.7%]
(b) Real-user evaluation
Model
Acceptance rate↑
FB/sample↓
Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct
7.5%
7.43
Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
50.0%
4.55
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
62.5%
3.73
Qwen3.8-27B
100.0%
0.30
Qwen3.6-Flash
95.0%
0.70
Qwen3.7-Max
92.5%
1.20
Qwen3.8-Max
97.5%
0.35
0.5B-Instruct improves from 6.8% open-loop accuracy to only 7.8% closed-loop accuracy, despite
access to further attempts. The capacity to interpret and incorporate a correction therefore appears
to constrain the benefit obtainable from feedback.
We also measure interaction cost as the total number of translation rounds across all samples di-
vided by the number of accepted specifications. This aggregate ratio is approximately 1.2 for the
highest-performing models, compared with 119.7 for Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct. It can exceed the ten-
round per-session budget because rounds spent on unsuccessful sessions contribute to the numerator.
Together, the ablation and interaction analyses indicate that semantic feedback supplies useful cor-
rective information, while translator capability determines how efficiently that information can be
converted into an accepted specification.
5.4
RELIABILITY OF THE SEMANTIC ACCEPTANCE LOOP
We assess the reliability of automated semantic acceptance through interface-level calibration and
a separate human audit. As shown in Table 2(a), direct NL–STL comparison achieves 92.8% and
94.4% agreement with expert labels on 400 cases. The back-translation interface achieves 398/400
agreement (99.5%), suggesting that an explicit NL representation of the candidate STL provides
a more reliable basis for acceptance decisions in this calibration. We further audit 634 specifica-
tions accepted by the complete framework. Experts confirm 629 as semantically correct, yielding
an acceptance precision of 99.2% (Wilson 95% CI: [98.2%, 99.7%]); the remaining five accepted
specifications (0.8%) are judged incorrect.
We also evaluate the framework with real users on 40 requirements shared across seven models,
yielding 280 model–requirement sessions. In each session, participants inspect the NL restatement
of a candidate STL specification and either accept it or submit a revised NL input. Within the ten-
round budget, 202 sessions (72.1%) reach participant acceptance. Participants provide 1,010 NL in-
puts in total: 280 initial requirements and 730 subsequent feedback inputs that lead to another trans-
lation attempt. As shown in Table 2(b), acceptance among the locally deployed models increases
from 7.5% for Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct to 100.0% for Qwen3.8-27B, while mean feedback per sam-
ple decreases from 7.43 to 0.30. The three models with larger parameter counts (Qwen3.6-Flash,
Qwen3.7-Max, and Qwen3.8-Max) achieve user acceptance rates of 92.5–97.5% while requiring
0.35–1.20 additional NL inputs per sample. Thus, these models attain high acceptance within the
ten-round budget with relatively few feedback inputs.
6
CONCLUSION
This work revisits NL-to-STL translation from the perspective of semantic alignment rather than
one-shot generation. While formal methods provide rigorous guarantees for systems satisfying a
specification, they do not ensure that the specification itself faithfully represents human intent. By
introducing a closed-loop feedback mechanism before downstream formal reasoning, we enable
generated specifications to be validated and refined through natural-language interaction. Our re-
sults demonstrate that feedback can substantially improve specification fidelity while revealing the
importance of feedback quality and model capability. More broadly, this work establishes seman-
tic feedback as an alignment layer between human intent and machine-executable formal artifacts.
Formal verification guarantees correctness with respect to a given specification; semantic feedback
ensures that the specification being verified is the one intended by its human author.
9


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the four human experts who contributed to the construction of the dataset by providing
domain knowledge, annotating data samples, and reviewing the quality of the collected data. Their
valuable efforts and insights were essential for building a reliable and meaningful benchmark for
this work.
REFERENCES
Rajeev Alur. Principles of cyber-physical systems. MIT press, 2015.
Nikos Arechiga. Specifying safety of autonomous vehicles in signal temporal logic. In 2019 IEEE
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp. 58–63. IEEE, 2019.
Calin Belta and Sadra Sadraddini. Formal methods for control synthesis: An optimization perspec-
tive. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 2(1):115–140, 2019.
Yongchao Chen, Rujul Gandhi, Yang Zhang, and Chuchu Fan. Nl2tl: Transforming natural lan-
guages to temporal logics using large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 15880–15903, 2023.
Matthias Cosler, Christopher Hahn, Daniel Mendoza, Frederik Schmitt, and Caroline Trippel.
nl2spec: Interactively translating unstructured natural language to temporal logics with large
language models. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification, pp. 383–396.
Springer, 2023.
Yue Fang, Zhi Jin, Jie An, Hongshen Chen, Xiaohong Chen, and Naijun Zhan. Enhancing trans-
formation from natural language to signal temporal logic using llms with diverse external knowl-
edge. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pp. 10446–10458,
2025a.
Yue Fang, Zhi Jin, Jie An, Jia Li, Hongshen Chen, Xiaohong Chen, and Naijun Zhan. Clarifystl: An
interactive llm agent framework for stl transformation through requirements clarification. ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 2025b.
Yue Fang, Zhi Jin, Jie An, Hongshen Chen, Xiaohong Chen, and Naijun Zhan. Clarifystl: An
interactive llm agent framework for stl transformation through requirements clarification. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2605.01209, 2026a.
Yue Fang, Zhi Jin, Jie An, Hongshen Chen, Xiaohong Chen, and Naijun Zhan. Restl: Reinforcement
learning guided by multi-aspect rewards for signal temporal logic transformation. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 40, pp. 30682–30689, 2026b.
Francesco Fuggitti and Tathagata Chakraborti. Nl2ltl–a python package for converting natural lan-
guage (nl) instructions to linear temporal logic (ltl) formulas. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 16428–16430, 2023.
Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yujiu Yang, Nan Duan, Weizhu Chen, et al. Critic: Large
language models can self-correct with tool-interactive critiquing. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, volume 2024, pp. 57734–57811, 2024.
Jie He, Ezio Bartocci, Dejan Niˇckovi´c, Haris Isakovic, and Radu Grosu. Deepstl: from english
requirements to signal temporal logic. In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on
Software Engineering, pp. 610–622, 2022.
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan
Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2024, pp. 39578–39601, 2024.
Jason Xinyu Liu, Ziyi Yang, Ifrah Idrees, Sam Liang, Benjamin Schornstein, Stefanie Tellex, and
Ankit Shah. Lang2ltl: Translating natural language commands to temporal robot task specifica-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11649, 2023.
10


Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
with self-feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:46534–46594, 2023.
Oded Maler and Dejan Nickovic. Monitoring temporal properties of continuous signals. In Inter-
national symposium on formal techniques in real-time and fault-tolerant systems, pp. 152–166.
Springer, 2004.
Yuchen Mao, Tianci Zhang, Xu Cao, Zhongyao Chen, Xinkai Liang, Bochen Xu, and Hao Fang.
Nl2stl: Transformation from logic natural language to signal temporal logics using llama2. In
2024 IEEE International Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems (CIS) and IEEE
International Conference on Robotics, Automation and Mechatronics (RAM), pp. 469–474. IEEE,
2024.
Noushin Mehdipour, Matthias Althoff, Radboud Duintjer Tebbens, and Calin Belta. Formal methods
to comply with rules of the road in autonomous driving: State of the art and grand challenges.
Automatica, 152:110692, 2023.
Daniel Mendoza, Christopher Hahn, and Caroline Trippel. Translating natural language to temporal
logics with large language models and model checkers. In 2024 Formal Methods in Computer-
Aided Design (FMCAD), pp. 1–11. IEEE, 2024.
Jiayi Pan, Glen Chou, and Dmitry Berenson. Data-efficient learning of natural language to linear
temporal logic translators for robot task specification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08006, 2023.
Giuseppe Silano, Tomas Baca, Robert Penicka, Davide Liuzza, and Martin Saska. Power line inspec-
tion tasks with multi-aerial robot systems via signal temporal logic specifications. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 6(2):4169–4176, 2021.
Yixuan Wang, Licheng Luo, Yu Fu, Kaidi Xu, Yue Dong, and Mingyu Cai. Scp-nl2tl: Selective con-
formal prediction with semantic verification for natural language to temporal logic specifications.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.05439, 2026.
Bowen Ye, Zhijian Li, Junyue Huang, Junkai Ma, and Xiang Yin. Reasonstl: Bridging natural
language and signal temporal logic via tool-augmented process-rewarded learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2605.06483, 2026.
Xiang Yin, Bingzhao Gao, and Xiao Yu.
Formal synthesis of controllers for safety-critical au-
tonomous systems: Developments and challenges. Annual Reviews in Control, 57:100940, 2024.
11


A
BENCHMARK CONSTRUCTION
Data collection. The benchmark covers advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS), unmanned
aerial vehicles (Drone), smart homes, and automated guided vehicles (AGV). Five domain experts
wrote the requirements. Two experts independently covered AGV because it spans a broader set
of navigation, scheduling, and safety tasks. All annotators followed the same STL guideline and
passed a qualification exercise.
We retained 3,556 of the initial 4,000 requirements after consistency checks and expert adjudication.
Table 3(a) reports the resulting domain distribution. The larger AGV share follows the planned
allocation of two independent annotators to that domain. The distribution was fixed before sampling,
and the other three domains remain within 5.2 percentage points of one another.
The retained set contains 1,455 simple, 1,640 medium, and 461 hard requirements. Among them,
1,100 are annotated as formula errors or underspecified requirements, including 402 minimal con-
trastive pairs in which the requirement is held fixed and the candidate formulas differ in one semantic
dimension. Consequently, the benchmark evaluates formula generation and whether a system can
distinguish an output-side mistranslation from information that is absent at the input.
Comparison with existing corpora. Table 4 positions the benchmark relative to three representative
NL-to-STL corpora. The comparison is based on the supervision released or explicitly described by
each work; “–” means that a dimension is not reported as an annotation target.
The comparison makes the intended trade-off explicit. Existing corpora provide substantially more
correct translation pairs and are therefore valuable for large-scale training. Our benchmark serves a
different purpose. Domain experts write and cross-review its requirements and defect annotations,
which limits scale while supporting diagnostic supervision: formula-level errors, missing input in-
formation, localized explanations, corrected targets, and controlled minimal pairs are represented in
a single corpus. These annotations provide the signals used here to evaluate the two feedback paths
in the closed loop.
Annotation and quality control. Each instance pairs a natural-language requirement with an STL
specification and semantic metadata. Well-specified cases admit a complete formula. Translation-
error cases pair a sufficient requirement with an incorrect candidate and its correction. Underspec-
ified cases omit a threshold, temporal bound, trigger, scope condition, or other information needed
for formalization.
Experts first judged whether the requirement was sufficient and then checked the STL, keeping input
uncertainty separate from translation error. Cross-review raised 123 substantive objections. Adju-
dication revised and retained 120 cases and removed three for which agreement was not reached.
These revisions show that cross-review materially affected the released annotations.
Nested temporal subset. The 81-case Nested subset covers temporal anchoring, operator scope,
event–state distinctions, nested implication, and dependencies across temporal windows. These
cases are designed to test structural alignment beyond lexical overlap.
Main evaluation set. Every translator and both evaluation conditions use the same random sample
of 500 cases: 335 well-specified requirements, 122 translation errors, and 43 underspecified inputs
(Table 3(b)). Thus, one third of the set requires either output correction or input clarification. This
Table 3: Statistics of the benchmark and evaluation set.
(a) Domain distribution
Domain
Instances
Proportion
ADAS
669
18.8%
Drone
724
20.4%
Smart Home
853
24.0%
AGV
1,310
36.8%
Total
3,556
100.0%
(b) Evaluation-set composition
Instance type
Count
Proportion
Well-specified
335
67.0%
Translation error
122
24.4%
Underspecified input
43
8.6%
Total
500
100.0%
12


Table 4: Comparison with representative NL-to-STL corpora. Dataset size alone is not a quality measure; the
lower rows distinguish translation corpora from data that explicitly supervise semantic diagnosis and correction.
Property
DeepSTL He et al. (2022)
STL-DivEn Fang et al. (2025a)
STL-BENCH Ye et al. (2026)
Ours
NL–STL pairs
∼120K
∼16K
28,880
3,556
Language
English
English
English + Chinese
English
Construction
Grammar-generated
Seed + LLM augmentation
Scenario/template + LLM
Expert-authored
Domain grounding
Symbolic
Partial
6 domains / 33 scenarios
4 CPS domains
Formula-level error labels
–
–
–
759
Underspecified-input labels
–
–
–
341
Minimal contrastive pairs
–
–
–
402
Error explanation and correction
–
–
–
Yes
Whole-corpus expert cross-review
–
–
–
Yes
composition deliberately stresses both feedback paths; it should not be interpreted as an estimate of
their prevalence in deployed requirements.
B
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION AND COMPONENT VALIDATION
Closed-loop protocol. Following the notation in Section 4, the forward translator F generates a
candidate specification φt = F(ht), and the backward translator B renders the semantic observation
ˆxt = B(φt). At the implementation level, an acceptance mechanism compares the requirement
with ˆxt and returns a decision at ∈{accept, revise} together with a localized discrepancy δt upon
rejection. This automated mechanism instantiates the user-verification step in the benchmark-scale
evaluation; human participants make the decision in the real-user study. The system converts δt
into a natural-language correction that is appended to the interaction context ht for the next round.
The budget is K = 10 rounds. A session ends upon acceptance, budget exhaustion, or a system-
side failure. Algorithm 1 gives the complete procedure; this section reports the implementation and
evaluation details omitted there.
The reference STL is withheld from F, B, the acceptance mechanism, and the simulated user; it
is used only for external assessment. For an underspecified case, the simulated user and automated
acceptance mechanism receive the expert-authored corrected NL as an intent anchor. The forward
translator does not receive this anchor directly and sees only the clarification produced through
the simulated interaction. This design uses the corrected NL to represent latent user intent while
preventing direct leakage of the reference formula.
Translator. The translator receives the requirement, available signal definitions, and accumulated
feedback. Its prompt requires exact preservation of predicates, polarity, thresholds, units, Boolean
dependencies, temporal operators, and interval boundaries. The full feedback history is retained
across rounds.
For underspecified inputs, the system requests the smallest clarification needed to make formaliza-
tion possible and does not ask the translator to guess a missing value. For translation errors, feedback
identifies the semantic discrepancy without revealing the reference STL.
Back-translation. The backward translator B parses φt into an abstract syntax tree and renders an
inspectable account of its semantics. The rendering preserves:
• predicates, variables, comparison directions, and thresholds;
• negation and Boolean dependencies;
• temporal operators and interval boundaries;
• implication antecedents and consequents;
• the scope and nesting of temporal subformulas.
The input to B is restricted to φt; it cannot inspect x, the reference formula, or earlier candidates.
Thus, the rendered text describes the candidate without attempting to repair it. This converts cross-
representation comparison into natural-language alignment while preserving the structure of the
formal artifact.
Acceptance mechanism. In automated evaluation, the mechanism compares the current intent an-
chor with ˆxt; in the real-user study, the participant performs this comparison. Acceptance requires
13


Table 5: Prompt responsibilities in the closed-loop system.
Component
Input
Required behavior
Sufficiency
gate
Requirement and in-
teraction history
Identify information that is necessary for for-
malization but absent from the current re-
quirement.
Clarification
Missing information
Ask one minimal and answerable question
without suggesting an arbitrary value.
Translator
Requirement,
signal
definitions, and feed-
back history
Produce a syntactically valid STL formula
while preserving all confirmed semantic con-
straints.
Back-
translation
Generated STL only
Render the complete formula semantics with-
out consulting the original requirement or in-
troducing new information.
Acceptance
Requirement and se-
mantic observation
Accept only under semantic agreement; oth-
erwise return a localized discrepancy.
Corrective
feedback
Detected discrepancy
Express the smallest actionable correction
without exposing the reference STL.
agreement in predicates, polarity, thresholds, units, temporal bounds, logical dependencies, and
temporal scope. A candidate is rejected when any required condition is missing, contradicted, or
assigned to the wrong temporal context.
Rejections follow one of two paths. Missing information in x triggers clarification; a mismatch be-
tween a sufficient x and ˆxt triggers corrective feedback. The first path avoids invented requirements.
The second assigns a detected translation error to the translator and does not treat it as missing user
information.
Prompt interfaces. The operational prompts enforce the component-specific constraints summa-
rized in Table 5.
The components in Table 5 serve distinct functions. Restricting back-translation to the generated
formula prevents it from silently repairing the candidate, while keeping the reference annotation
outside all operational prompts prevents target leakage. This design requires the loop to localize and
communicate a semantic discrepancy while keeping the gold specification hidden.
A condensed translator instruction is:
Given the requirement, signal definitions, and feedback history, produce one syntactically
valid STL formula. Preserve every stated condition, polarity, threshold, unit, Boolean de-
pendency, temporal operator, and interval. Use only information provided by the require-
ment or confirmed through feedback. Return the STL formula without additional explana-
tion.
The back-translation instruction is:
Describe the semantics of the given STL formula in natural language. Preserve every
predicate, comparison, threshold, interval, Boolean dependency, implication, and temporal
scope. Read only the STL formula. Do not infer missing information, repair the formula,
or consult the original requirement.
The acceptance instruction is:
Compare the requirement with the semantic observation. Accept only if all required pred-
icates, values, polarities, dependencies, temporal bounds, and scopes agree. If the require-
ment lacks necessary information, request clarification. Otherwise, identify the minimal
semantic discrepancy that must be corrected.
14


Evaluation metrics. Let Ii denote the intended semantics, φi,0 the first candidate, and ˆφi the
delivered formula for case i. Open-loop accuracy is Accopen = N −1 PN
i=1 I[Match(Ii, φi,0)].
Closed-loop accuracy uses the operational stopping criterion, Accclosed = N −1 PN
i=1 I[∃t <
K : ai,t = accept]. In the acceptance-noise ablation, we also report externally judged accuracy,
Acctrue = N −1 PN
i=1 I[Match(Ii, ˆφi)]. If Li is the number of translator calls, interaction cost is
Feedback/Case = N −1 PN
i=1(Li −1). Failed cases remain in both the accuracy denominator and
the cost calculation. We retain the full sequence of candidates, observations, decisions, feedback,
and termination states for case-level auditing.
Acceptance-interface calibration. The 99.5% figure reports the agreement of the complete accep-
tance interface with expert accept/reject labels. It measures decision quality and does not describe
how fluently ˆxt reads. After B renders the STL abstract syntax tree, DeepSeek-v4-Flash, Kimi-K3,
and GLM-5.3 compare x with ˆxt; majority vote gives the final decision. The calibration set con-
tains 400 expert-labeled cases: 249 semantic matches and 151 semantic mismatches. The interface
correctly identifies 248 of 249 matches and 150 of 151 mismatches. Its overall accuracy is therefore
398/400, or 99.5%. The mechanical rule layer resolves 92 cases without an API call.
Two interface errors account for the gap from perfect calibration. The panel falsely rejects one case
whose numerical expression is semantically equivalent after unit normalization. It falsely accepts
another case where an unresolved conjunction-disjunction scope changes the intended semantics.
The panel makes no error on the ADAS, Drone, Smart Home, and Nested cases in the calibration
set; both errors fall in the AGV subset, where accuracy is 97.5%.
Table 6 compares this interface with two direct NL–STL judges. The direct judges are evaluated on
500 cases. The back-translation interface uses a separate 400-case calibration set, so the results are
not paired. The Nested column reports recall on the available positive Nested cases and makes the
structural difference between the interfaces explicit.
The two direct judges obtain 33.3% and 77.3% Nested recall on their 500-case evaluation. The
back-translation interface obtains 81/81 recall on the positive Nested cases in its separate calibration
set. This result is consistent with the intended role of structured rendering, which exposes temporal
scope, anchoring, and antecedent–consequent relations before comparison. Different evaluation sets
and panel aggregation prevent a controlled attribution of the observed gap to structured rendering
alone.
C
DOMAIN-WISE RESULTS AND NESTED ANALYSIS
Complete translation results. Table 8 reports all seven translators on the shared 500-instance set
under open-loop and closed-loop evaluation.
The measured interaction gain is non-monotonic across the seven models. Qwen2.5-0.5B improves
by 1.0 percentage point, indicating little benefit from feedback under this protocol. The 3B and
7B models yield the largest gains, at 30.4 and 30.8 points. The four higher-performing models
begin with stronger open-loop results, reach 98.0–99.2% closed-loop accuracy, and use 0.19–0.41
feedback messages per case. Within this evaluation, the largest gains occur for the 3B and 7B
models. The 0.5B model shows little net gain despite frequent feedback, while the four higher-
performing models present fewer initial errors.
The observed relation between closed-loop accuracy and feedback cost is also operationally relevant.
Higher-capacity translators reach their reported accuracy with fewer repair rounds. Within the eval-
Table 6: Validation of semantic comparison interfaces. Overall and
Nested results retain their original denominators because the proto-
cols use separate evaluation sets.
Interface
Overall accuracy
Nested recall
Direct: DeepSeek-v4-Flash
464/500 (92.8%)
14/42 (33.3%)
Direct: Qwen3.6-27B
472/500 (94.4%)
34/44 (77.3%)
Back-translation panel
398/400 (99.5%)
81/81 (100.0%)
Table 7: Closed-loop results on the
81-instance Nested subset.
Model
Correct
Accuracy
Qwen3.8-27B
74/81
91.4%
Qwen3.6-Flash
78/81
96.3%
Qwen3.7-Max
80/81
98.8%
Qwen3.8-Max
77/81
95.1%
15


Table 8: Open-loop and closed-loop results on the shared 500-instance evaluation set (reproduced from Table 1
for self-contained reference). Gain is reported in percentage points (pp).
Model
Open-loop Acc↑
Closed-loop Acc↑
Gain (pp)↑
Feedback/sample↓
Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct
6.8%
7.8%
+1.0
8.34
Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
17.6%
48.0%
+30.4
5.34
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
45.2%
76.0%
+30.8
2.83
Qwen3.8-27B
86.4%
98.0%
+11.6
0.41
Qwen3.6-Flash
81.4%
99.0%
+17.6
0.32
Qwen3.7-Max
89.0%
99.2%
+10.2
0.20
Qwen3.8-Max
88.6%
99.2%
+10.6
0.19
Table 9: True semantic accuracy under informative feedback and an uninformative retry instruction.
Model
Informative
Uninformative
Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
44.0%
17.5%
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
76.0%
50.0%
Qwen3.8-27B
98.0%
88.0%
Qwen3.8-Max
99.5%
89.9%
uated set, all four larger models receive an operational acceptance on every ADAS and AGV case.
Their remaining non-Nested unresolved sessions occur in Drone and Smart Home, while Nested
cases are the only unresolved category shared by all four. This distribution suggests that structural
composition contributes to the remaining difficulty.
Nested temporal reasoning. Table 7 reports closed-loop performance on the 81-instance Nested
subset. Relative to the corresponding 500-case results, accuracy decreases by 0.4–6.6 percentage
points, with the largest reduction observed for Qwen3.8-27B. The best result in this table is 80 of 81
cases, indicating that most cases in this subset are resolved under the localized-feedback protocol.
Residual failures mainly involve incorrect temporal anchoring, operator scope, event–state con-
fusion, and dependencies between nested temporal windows. These errors are difficult to detect
through lexical overlap: a candidate may preserve every predicate and numerical value while at-
taching them to the wrong temporal context. The subset therefore evaluates structural semantic
alignment beyond token-level coverage.
Informative feedback ablation. Table 9 compares localized corrective feedback with a generic
retry instruction that identifies no semantic discrepancy.
A generic retry yields lower accuracy than localized feedback in all four conditions. The observed
differences are 26.5 and 26.0 percentage points for the 3B and 7B translators and 10.0 and 9.6 points
for the two larger models. These results indicate that localized semantic content contributes beyond
the opportunity for another decoding attempt. This ablation uses a dedicated subset, so its values are
not interchangeable with the 500-case main results.
Acceptance noise ablation. We inject a 10% false-positive rate into the acceptance signal. Table 10
separates apparent convergence from externally judged accuracy because a false acceptance ends
the loop even when a semantic mismatch remains.
Noise raises apparent convergence while lowering semantic accuracy. For Qwen2.5-7B, the former
reaches 92.0% as the latter falls from 76.0% to 62.5%. The loss is larger for the 3B and 7B translators
(7.0 and 13.5 points) than for the two stronger models (2.0 and 2.1 points), consistent with weaker
translators presenting more incorrect candidates that can be accepted prematurely. The results show
that acceptance quality directly affects whether iteration produces genuine correction or premature
termination.
D
HUMAN EVALUATION AND INTERACTION CASES
Expert audit of automatic acceptance. Domain experts independently reviewed 634 outputs ac-
cepted by the automatic loop. A case counted as correct only when its complete STL semantics
matched the intended requirement. Experts confirmed 629 cases and rejected five.
16


Table 10: Effect of 10% false-positive acceptance noise. Baseline and noisy true accuracy are externally
evaluated.
Model
Baseline true Acc.
Apparent convergence
Noisy true Acc.
Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
44.0%
83.0%
37.0%
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
76.0%
92.0%
62.5%
Qwen3.8-27B
98.0%
99.5%
96.0%
Qwen3.8-Max
99.5%
100.0%
97.4%
Table 11: Expert audit of automatically accepted deliveries.
Domain
Accepted
Confirmed
Precision
ADAS
146
145
99.3%
Drone
146
144
98.6%
Smart Home
138
137
99.3%
AGV
137
136
99.3%
Nested
67
67
100.0%
Total
634
629
99.2%
Acceptance precision is 629/634 = 99.2%. The corresponding false-acceptance rate is 5/634 =
0.8%, and the Wilson 95% confidence interval for acceptance precision is [98.2%, 99.7%]. Table 11
reports the domain-wise results.
Because the audit conditions on automatic acceptance, it estimates acceptance precision and does not
measure agreement on an arbitrary sample. Domain-level precision ranges from 98.6% to 100.0%,
with the five false acceptances distributed across four application domains. The confidence interval
should therefore accompany the point estimate when characterizing reliability beyond the audited
outputs.
Human-in-the-loop evaluation. We replace the simulated user with human participants in this
evaluation. Participants provide 40 natural-language requirements, each of which is evaluated with
all seven models, yielding 280 model–requirement sessions. In each session, a participant inspects
the semantic observation of the current STL candidate and either accepts it or provides a natural-
language correction. A correction is counted as feedback only when it informs a subsequent trans-
lation attempt; a rejection after the final translation round is excluded from this measure.
Of the 280 sessions, 202 terminate with participant acceptance, yielding an acceptance rate of 72.1%.
Participants provide 1,010 NL inputs in total, comprising 280 initial requirements and 730 subse-
quent feedback messages that inform further translation attempts. Table 12 reports the model-wise
acceptance rates and interaction costs.
The 72.1% participant acceptance rate is distinct from the 99.2% automatic acceptance precision.
The former measures whether a participant and translator reach an acceptable specification within
the interaction budget; the latter estimates correctness only among outputs accepted by the auto-
mated judge. Model-wise results also show substantial variation in interaction cost. Qwen2.5-0.5B-
Instruct reaches acceptance in 3 of 40 sessions and requires 297 feedback messages. The four larger
models collectively reach acceptance in 154 of 160 sessions with 102 feedback messages. The 40
Table 12: Real-user evaluation on 40 shared requirements per model. Feedback counts participant-written
corrections used in a subsequent translation attempt; final-round rejections are excluded.
Model
Accepted
Acceptance rate
Feedback
FB/session
Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct
3/40
7.5%
297
7.43
Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct
20/40
50.0%
182
4.55
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
25/40
62.5%
149
3.73
Qwen3.8-27B
40/40
100.0%
12
0.30
Qwen3.6-Flash
38/40
95.0%
28
0.70
Qwen3.7-Max
37/40
92.5%
48
1.20
Qwen3.8-Max
39/40
97.5%
14
0.35
17


shared requirements support a comparison of these broad trends, although they do not establish a
fine-grained ranking among the larger models.
Representative execution traces. To complement the two traces presented in Section 4.3 (using
Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct), ten additional cases from the 500-instance evaluation are presented below:
two cases each for the 0.5B, 3B, 7B, 27B, and Flash translators. Each trace reports the natural-
language requirement, translator candidates φt, back-translations ˆxt, and selected logged feedback
δt from the simulated user. Repeated rounds and long feedback messages are condensed without
changing their reported outcome. Here, ACCEPT records the operational decision made by the ac-
ceptance mechanism; independent correctness is assessed separately by the expert audit above.
Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct and Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct.
Connective confusion (0.5B, 7 rounds →ACCEPT).
Requirement: “At all times either the service brake or the spring-applied parking brake must be
available.”
Round 1. φ0 = G[0,∞)(service brake ∧parking brake). ˆx0: “At all times, both the
service brake and the spring-applied parking brake are available.” δ0: “I meant that at least one
must be available: either the service brake or the spring-applied parking brake. The restatement
incorrectly requires both to be available.”
Round 2. The translator emits an unparseable output; the scaffold mechanism recovers and re-enters
the loop.
Rounds 3–6. φt = G[0,∞)(service brake ∧parking brake) in every round. ˆxt: “At all
times, both the service brake and the spring-applied parking brake shall be available.” δ4: “I meant
‘either the service brake or the spring-applied parking brake,’ not ‘both.’ At all times, at least one of
the two brakes must be available; they do not both need to be available simultaneously.”
Round 7. φ6 = G[0,∞)(service brake ∨parking brake). ˆx6: “At all times, either the ser-
vice brake is available or the spring-applied parking brake is available.” The acceptance mechanism
returns ACCEPT. A single-token ∧→∨substitution requires six REVISE decisions and one scaffold
recovery.
Unreachable time bound (0.5B, 10 rounds →unresolved).
Requirement: “Keep the laundry-room exhaust fan running throughout the next 240 seconds.”
Round 1. φ0 = G[0,∞)(fan running ∧fan running). ˆx0: “At all times, ‘laundry room
exhaust fan running’ is active and ‘laundry room exhaust fan running’ is active.” δ0: “I mean
throughout the next two hundred forty seconds, not at all times. The laundry room exhaust fan must
keep running throughout that window, but I do not require it to keep running beyond it.”
Rounds 2–10. Every candidate is identical to φ0 (round 5 triggers a parse failure that the scaffold
recovers). δ4: “I meant ‘throughout the next 240 seconds,’ not ‘At all times.’ I require the laundry-
room exhaust fan to keep running only within that window, not indefinitely.” The protocol returns
unresolved after K = 10. Two errors survive every round: the bound remains [0, ∞), although the
requirement specifies [0, 240], and the predicate remains conjoined with itself. In this case, the 0.5B
translator does not modify the numerical interval despite repeated feedback.
Temporal anchoring repair (3B, 3 rounds →ACCEPT).
Requirement: “Any time the vehicle reaches the parking approach zone, the parking planner must
become active within 2 seconds.”
Round 1. φ0 = G[0,2](at zone →planner active). ˆx0: “Throughout the first 2 seconds
([0, 2], both endpoints included), whenever vehicle at parking approach zone is active, parking plan-
ner active must hold.” δ0: “I did not mean ‘Throughout the first 2 seconds’ from time 0. I meant that
each time the vehicle reaches the parking approach zone, the parking planner must become active
within 2 seconds of that event, not immediately or continuously.”
Round 2. φ1 = F[0,2](at zone →planner active). ˆx1: “At some point within the closed
interval [0, 2] seconds from time 0, without being triggered by any event, if vehicle at parking ap-
18


proach zone is active, then parking planner active holds.” δ1: “I meant the obligation to be triggered
any time the vehicle reaches the parking approach zone, not once from time 0. For every such arrival,
the parking planner must become active within 2 seconds of that arrival.”
Round 3. φ2 = G[0,∞)(at zone→F[0,2] planner active). ˆx2: “Whenever vehicle at parking
approach zone is active, parking planner active must become true within [0, 2] seconds, including
both endpoints.” The acceptance mechanism returns ACCEPT. The repair moves the 2-second dead-
line from the outer temporal operator to the inner eventuality.
Temporal anchoring plateau (3B, 10 rounds →unresolved).
Requirement: “Any time the route becomes unavailable, the route-guidance fallback must become
active within 3 seconds.”
Round 1. φ0 = G[0,3](route unavail →fallback active). ˆx0: “Throughout the first
3 seconds ([0, 3], both endpoints included), whenever route unavailable is active, route guidance
fallback must be active.” δ0: “I meant ‘within 3 seconds’ to be measured from each time the route
becomes unavailable, not from a fixed starting time. I require the route-guidance fallback to become
active by that deadline, not necessarily immediately.”
Rounds 2–10. Every candidate is identical to φ0; the 3-second interval never leaves the outer opera-
tor. δ7: “I meant ‘within 3 seconds’ to be measured from each time the route becomes unavailable,
not from the start. I meant this to apply ‘Any time,’ not only ‘Throughout the first 3 seconds.’ ”
The protocol returns unresolved after K = 10. The intended structure matches the previous case,
G[0,∞)(·→F[0,3]·), yet the 3B translator settles on a fixed point. The same error type is repaired for
one input and persistent for another.
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct and Qwen3.8-27B.
Incremental structural assembly (7B, 7 rounds →ACCEPT).
Requirement: “Whenever the driver presses the hazard switch or an automatic emergency call is
placed, the hazard lights must start flashing within 0.5 seconds.”
Round 1. φ0 = G[0,∞)(switch ∨call). ˆx0: “At all times, ‘driver pressed hazard switch’ is
active or ‘automatic emergency call placed’ is active.” δ0: “I did not mean that either event must be
active at all times. I meant either event to trigger the missing obligation: the hazard lights must start
flashing within 0.5 seconds, with that deadline measured from the triggering event.”
Round 2. φ1 = G[0,∞)(F[0,0.5]flash ∨F[0,0.5]flash). The candidate adds the response but
drops both triggers. δ1 restates that each response must be conditioned on the corresponding event.
Round 3. φ2 = G[0,∞)((switch ∨call) ∧F[0,0.5]flash). ˆx2 requires both the trigger disjunc-
tion and the response at all times; the acceptance mechanism returns REVISE, and the simulated user
provides another correction.
Round 4. φ3 = G[0,∞)((switch →F[0,0.5]flash) ∨(call →F[0,0.5]flash)). ˆx3: “At all
times, at least one of the two trigger–response conditions must hold.” The pairs are correct, but the
disjunction can satisfy the formula while one obligation is violated.
Rounds 5–6. The translator retains the ∨-joined pair. The simulated user continues to require both
conditional obligations.
Round 7. φ6 = (switch →F[0,0.5]flash) ∧(call →F[0,0.5]flash). ˆx6 states that both
trigger–response rules must hold. The acceptance mechanism returns ACCEPT. The interaction
progressively assembles the trigger, response, implication, and conjunction structure.
Structural stagnation (7B, 10 rounds →unresolved).
Requirement: “For the next 60 seconds, a rear-path result must be updated within 10 seconds when-
ever the reverse-motion inhibit is active.”
Round 1. φ0 = F[0,60](inhibit ∧F[0,10]updated). ˆx0: “At some point within [0, 60] seconds,
reverse-motion inhibit is active and a rear-path result is updated within 10 seconds.” δ0: “I meant
the obligation to apply whenever the reverse-motion inhibit is active throughout the 60 seconds, not
19


just at one point. Each 10-second deadline must run from the instant the inhibit is active. I did not
require the inhibit to become active at all.”
Round 2. φ1 = G[0,60](inhibit ∧(F[0,10]updated U[0,∞) inhibit)). ˆx1 requires the inhibit
to hold throughout the 60-second window and nests the update inside an Until clause. δ1: “I did
not require the reverse-motion inhibit to remain active throughout that period. I require a rear-path
result update within each triggered deadline.”
Rounds 3–10. The translator reproduces φ1 unchanged after every targeted correction. The protocol
returns unresolved after K = 10. The predicates and intervals are retained, while the required
implication remains absent.
Reach-and-maintain via Until (27B, 8 rounds →ACCEPT).
Requirement: “The drone must reach the cruise altitude band within 40 seconds and keep the altitude
between 78 and 82 m for the following 5 minutes.”
Round 1. φ0 = F[0,40]((78 ≤alt ≤82) ∧G[0,300](78 ≤alt ≤82)). ˆx0 places reaching the band
and the 300-second invariance inside one future state. δ0: “The drone may be outside the altitude
band before it reaches between 78 and 82 meters within 40 seconds. The 5 minutes must begin when
the drone reaches that band, not at time 0.”
Rounds 2–7. The candidates alternate among a global implication, a conjunction of reach and main-
tenance, and the original F[0,40] structure. The user repeatedly specifies that reaching is an achieve-
ment obligation and that the maintenance interval starts at the achieved state.
Round 8. φ7 = ¬(78≤alt≤82) U[0,40] ((78≤alt≤82) ∧G[0,300](78≤alt≤82)). ˆx7 states
that the altitude remains outside the band until a point within 40 seconds where the band holds and
is then maintained for 300 seconds. The acceptance mechanism returns ACCEPT. The Until operator
sequences the reaching and maintenance phases.
Periodic recurrence gap (27B, 10 rounds →unresolved).
Requirement: “Starting from midnight, the cleaning robot must perform housework and cleaning
every day from 10:00 AM to 10:30 AM. After finishing, it must wash and store its tools, then charge
itself while keeping Bluetooth enabled and WiFi connected.”
Round 1. φ0 contains G[0,∞)(housework ∧cleaning) and two implications for tool handling
and connectivity. ˆx0: “At all times, the cleaning robot is actively performing housework and clean-
ing; whenever cleaning finishes, it washes and stores its tools; whenever it charges, Bluetooth and
WiFi remain active.” δ0: “I meant cleaning to occur every day from 10:00 AM to 10:30 AM, not at
all times. After washing and storing its tools, the robot must then charge itself. Charging must be an
ordered obligation.”
Round 2. The schedule becomes G[36000,36180](housework∧cleaning); the remaining formula
adds an Until relation from tool handling to charging. ˆx1 interprets [36000, 36180] as a single 10:00–
10:03 AM window. The simulated user reiterates “every day from 10:00 AM to 10:30 AM.”
Rounds 3–7. The same single-window encoding and its incorrect end time persist.
Rounds 8–10. The schedule reverts to G[0,∞)(housework ∧cleaning), while the sequential
post-cleaning clauses improve. The daily recurrence is never represented. The protocol returns
unresolved after K = 10. This trace illustrates a periodic schedule that the bounded STL fragment
and translation pipeline used in this evaluation do not represent directly.
Qwen3.6-Flash.
Multi-conjunct progressive repair (Flash, 6 rounds →ACCEPT).
Requirement: “Starting from midnight, the irrigation system must water the garden for exactly 15
minutes beginning at 6:00 AM. After watering, soil moisture must exceed 60% within 5 minutes. If
it drops below 40% again before noon, the system must trigger a second 10-minute watering cycle.
Water pressure must remain between 200 and 400 kPa throughout all watering.”
Round 1. φ0 combines G[21600,22500]watering, G[0,∞)F[22500,22800](moisture > 0.6), a
globally scoped low-moisture trigger whose response is G[0,600]watering, and a pressure con-
20


straint on water pressure. ˆx0 interprets the moisture deadline as a moving obligation and the
second cycle as watering during the first 600 seconds. δ0: “I meant water pressure to remain be-
tween 200 and 400 kPa. I meant the soil moisture sensor to read above 60% within 5 minutes after
watering, not to satisfy a moving deadline at every moment. I meant a drop below 40% again before
12:00 PM to trigger a second watering cycle of 10 minutes following that drop.”
Round 2.
The global wrapper is removed from the post-watering moisture deadline.
The
second-cycle clause becomes an implication from F[22500,43200](moisture
<
0.4) to
G[0,600]watering. δ1: “I need that cycle to follow the low-moisture trigger, not require water-
ing throughout the first 600 seconds from midnight.”
Round 3. The translator introduces G[0,43200]((moisture < 0.4)→F[0,600]G[0,600]watering).
The user rejects the added 600-second start deadline and clarifies that the trigger applies only after
the initial watering.
Rounds 4–5. The added start deadline is removed, and the trigger scope is narrowed first to [0, 43200]
and then to [22500, 43200]. The remaining discrepancy is the pressure unit. δ4: “I meant water
pressure to remain between 200 and 400 kPa, not between 200 and 400 in Pa. Preserve kPa or
correctly convert the bounds when using Pa.”
Round 6.
φ5 retains the four corrected clauses and replaces the pressure signal with
water pressure kpa. ˆx5 preserves the 6:00–6:15 AM watering window, post-watering mois-
ture deadline, conditional second cycle, and pressure range. The acceptance mechanism returns
ACCEPT. In this trace, each retained correction remains present in the accepted candidate.
False mismatch from back-translation (Flash, 10 rounds →unresolved).
Requirement: “Whenever solar generation is greater than household demand, raise the battery charg-
ing command to at least 30 percent within 10 seconds.”
Round 1. φ0 = G[0,∞)(solar > demand →F[0,10](battery cmd ≥0.3)). The candidate is
semantically correct. ˆx0: “Whenever solar generation is not equal to household demand, the battery
charging command must reach at least 0.3 within [0, 10] seconds.” δ0: “I meant the trigger to be
‘solar generation is greater than household demand,’ not ‘solar generation is not equal to house-
hold demand.’ I do not want this obligation to apply when solar generation is less than household
demand.”
Rounds 2–10. The translator reproduces the same correct φ0 in every round. The back-translator
renders > as “not equal to” every time, so the simulated user repeats the same correction. The
acceptance mechanism records a semantic mismatch and returns REVISE. The protocol returns
unresolved after K = 10. In this logged case, the failure arises in B: the forward output is correct
from round 1, while the distorted observation prevents acceptance.
Interface-level failure modes. The audit identifies two additional interface errors. In one false
rejection, a semantically equivalent unit expression is treated as a surface mismatch. In one false
acceptance, a conjunction–disjunction scope ambiguity changes the logical dependency but passes
the calibration panel. Together with the comparison-rendering error above, these cases motivate
stronger unit normalization, explicit Boolean-scope auditing, and improved comparison rendering.
E
LIMITATIONS
Refinement gains depend on the translator’s observed ability to incorporate feedback. In this evalu-
ation, the 0.5B model gains only 1.0 percentage point despite frequent interaction, and full-formula
regeneration can modify previously correct subformulas. The current results therefore characterize
the seven evaluated translators under a ten-round budget; they do not establish a model-independent
capability threshold.
A further limitation concerns predicate grounding. Descriptions such as “a blue ball” do not by
themselves define an executable predicate. Deployment requires choices about sensing modalities,
representation spaces, decision thresholds, object identity, and robustness to environmental vari-
ation. A predicate-grounding layer must connect these choices to the formal specification, with
additional clarification when the intended grounding is not unique. External validity is also limited
by the focus on STL, four cyber-physical-system domains, and 280 human-interaction sessions.
21


F
FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND EXTENSIONS
We hypothesize that semantic observation and discrepancy-driven refinement could extend beyond
STL to other executable formal languages, including linear temporal logics, planning specifications,
program contracts, and workflow descriptions. This hypothesis is not evaluated here. Such exten-
sions would require language-specific observation mechanisms and separately calibrated acceptance
criteria.
A second direction is to study semantic acceptance together with formal verification, runtime moni-
toring, and controller synthesis. Counterexamples, execution traces, or behavioral trajectories could
provide additional feedback signals after intent-level review. Evaluating these signals within a uni-
fied closed-loop framework remains future work.
22
