Symbolic Execution of Constrained Horn Clauses
Johannes Weiser1, Zafer Esen2, Philipp R¨ummer2,3
1TU Vienna, Austria.
2Uppsala University, Sweden.
3University of Regensburg, Germany.
Contributing authors: johannes.weiser@tuwien.ac.at;
zafer.esen@it.uu.se; philipp.ruemmer@it.uu.se;
Abstract
Constrained Horn clauses (CHCs) are a fragment of first-order logic widely used
as an intermediate language for verification. We study constrained resolution as
a calculus for reasoning about the satisfiability of sets of CHCs. Constrained res-
olution forms a simple alternative to model checking algorithms such as CEGAR
and IC3 and is here shown to exhibit complementary features. We show that,
when CHCs encode programs, forward symbolic execution corresponds to posi-
tive unit hyper-resolution, and backward symbolic execution to SLD resolution,
which are special cases of constrained resolution. We formalize forward and back-
ward reasoning for linear and non-linear CHCs and transition systems, prove
refutational completeness under fair strategies, and develop subsumption criteria
for pruning redundant derivations. We moreover show that backward resolution
with subsumption generalizes k-induction to non-linear CHCs, and that forward
constrained resolution is related to the problem of constructing proofs in incor-
rectness logic. Lastly, we provide an experimental evaluation in the Eldarica
CHC solver on benchmarks from CHC-COMP.
Keywords: Constrained Horn clauses, Symbolic execution, Software verification,
Resolution, SLD, k-induction, Incorrectness logic
1 Introduction
Constrained Horn clauses (CHCs) are a fragment of first-order logic that has found
wide use as an intermediate language for verification, with applications ranging from
security analysis for smart contracts to the verification of programs in various lan-
guages [1–9]. CHCs enable the modular construction of verification tools by decoupling
1
arXiv:2610.03345v1  [cs.LO]  2 Oct 2026


the development of verification front-ends, which take care of parsing and processing
programs, applying the rules of some program logic, from CHC solvers as verification
back-ends that carry out the required semantic program analysis. When encoding a
program using CHCs, predicates typically represent the required annotations, such as
state invariants, loop invariants, or function contracts, while CHCs encode program
transitions as well as all further constraints on the annotations. A program is safe
when the corresponding set of CHCs is satisfiable.
To
analyze
CHCs,
CHC
solvers
such
as
Eldarica
[10],
Golem
[11],
Z3/Spacer [12], and LoAT [13] implement a variety of model checking algorithms, for
instance IC3 [14], CEGAR [15], loop acceleration [16], bounded model checking [17], or
transition power abstraction [18]. As a simple alternative to those algorithms, in this
article we study constrained resolution [19], a logical proof rule that enables solvers to
derive new clauses from a set of existing clauses in forward or backward direction. As
our first insight, we show that strategies to apply constrained resolution correspond
to symbolic execution, a widely used approach in program analysis in which some pro-
gram variables are initialized with symbols that represent arbitrary values, rather than
concrete ones [20, 21]. Although more limited for proving the correctness of programs
than algorithms used in software model checking, for instance IC3 or CEGAR, con-
strained resolution inherits the feature of symbolic execution of being very effective at
discovering bugs in programs, which here corresponds to proving the unsatisfiability
of CHCs. Since constrained resolution does not rely on relatively expensive steps such
as Craig interpolation [22, 23], it can be implemented easily even in the context of
complex theories like arrays or bit-vectors. We show that constrained resolution is also
surprisingly effective at proving programs correct, reflecting experiences in software
model checking [24].
As our second insight, we show that there is a correspondence between different
resolution strategies and known forms of symbolic execution: forward symbolic exe-
cution corresponds to constrained positive unit hyper-resolution, whereas backward
symbolic execution [25, 26] corresponds to SLD resolution [27] known from logic pro-
gramming [28]. Discussion of this correspondence goes back to the work of Kowalski,
who observed that resolution steps over Horn clauses can be interpreted as procedure
invocations [29], and to work in constraint logic programming [30]. We extend this view
to constrained resolution with background theories and make the connection to sym-
bolic execution explicit. We formalize both forward and backward resolution strategies
over linear and non-linear CHCs, prove their correctness, and study subsumption for
pruning redundant derivations.
Our third insight is that backward resolution combined with subsumption gen-
eralizes k-induction, a proof rule for invariants in which the consecution condition
assumes k correct iterations of a loop [31]. It is known that k-induction is a very effec-
tive rule for proving safety properties in both hardware and software verification (e.g.,
[31–33]). We show that backward reasoning through constrained resolution has the
effect of implicitly constructing the conditions that need to be checked when applying
k-induction. A similar observation was made for the relationship between k-induction
and backward symbolic execution in [34]. Constrained resolution is more general than
k-induction, however, since it applies also in the case of non-linear clauses.
2


As our fourth insight, we study the relationship between constrained resolution
and incorrectness logic, which is a logic that is dual to Hoare logic for reasoning
about failing executions of programs [35]. We show that forward resolution proofs for
CHCs encoding a program naturally translate to proofs in incorrectness logic, making
it possible, in particular, to automatically construct non-ground incorrectness proofs
automatically. The relationship between CHC proofs and incorrectness reasoning also
makes it possible to translate bespoke incorrectness proof rules, for instance for loop
acceleration, to the CHC world.
The main contributions of this article are:
(1) A formalization of symbolic execution as constrained resolution over CHCs,
including subsumption criteria for CHCs (Section 3 and Section 7).
(2) A study of forward and backward exploration strategies over both linear and
non-linear CHCs (Section 4 and Section 5).
(3) Discussion how the k-induction proof rule can be reduced to backward resolution
with clause subsumption (Section 6) and of the connection between constrained
resolution and incorrectness logic (Section 8).
(4) An experimental evaluation on CHC-COMP benchmarks (Section 9).
1.1 Motivating Example
Consider the program in Figure 1 (left side). The variable x is initialized to a nonde-
terministic value, and the while (*) loop, which may iterate any number of times,
alternates between adding 2 and subtracting 1 in each iteration. The program refers
to a placeholder predicate P(x, x0), which will later be replaced with the formulas
x = x0 and x >= x0. We can observe that the program is safe if P(x, x0) is inter-
preted as x >= x0: the loop body increases x by a net 1 per two iterations, so x >=
x0 holds whenever the loop is left. If P(x, x0) is interpreted as x = x0, the assertion
fails in every execution in which the loop iterates at least once.
The translation of the program to a set of CHCs is shown in Figure 1 (right side).
The encoding uses four clauses: a fact (1), representing the set of states at program
entry, rules (2) and (3) representing the loop body, and a goal (4) encoding the
assertion. The predicate q represents a loop invariant and has three arguments: the
current value of x, the flag b, and the initial value of x stored in x0.
To analyze the CHCs, we use constrained resolution [19], a variant of resolution [36]
in which syntactic unification is replaced by equality constraints:
p(¯s) ←B1 ∧φ1
H ←p(¯t) ∧B2 ∧φ2
H ←B1 ∧B2 ∧¯s = ¯t ∧φ1 ∧φ2
The rule derives a new clause by replacing the matched atom p(¯t) in the body of
the right premise with the body and constraints of the left premise. The equality
¯s = ¯t is used instead of syntactic unification because clause terms may involve theory-
interpreted symbols, such as in x + 2, whose equality is delegated to a theory solver.
The clause bodies B1, B2 are (possibly empty) conjunctions of atoms, and φ1, φ2 are
3


1
int x := ∗, b := 0;
2
int x0 := x;
3
while (∗) {
4
if (b = 0) x := x + 2;
5
else
x := x - 1;
6
b := 1 - b;
7
}
8
assert(P(x, x0));
q(x, b, x0) ←x = x0 ∧b = 0
(1)
q(x + 2, 1, x0) ←q(x, b, x0) ∧b = 0
(2)
q(x −1, 0, x0) ←q(x, b, x0) ∧b = 1
(3)
P(x, x0) ←q(x, b, x0)
(4)
Fig. 1: A program with a nondeterministic loop that either adds 2 to or subtracts 1
from x in each iteration (left), with its CHC encoding (right). The construct while (*)
denotes a loop that may execute any number of times. The variable x is initialized to
a nondeterministic value, and x0 records its initial value. Predicate q(x, b, x0) repre-
sents the set of states at the loop head, with x0 tracking the initial value of x. The
assertion contains a placeholder formula P(x, x0) in the program; in (4) the formula
is represented by the predicate P(x, x0), which is instantiated as x = x0 in Figure 2,
and as x ≥x0 in Figures 3, 4.
q(x0, 0, x0)
q(x0 + 2, 1, x0)
(1)
(2)
x = x0 ←x = x0
x = x0 ←x = x0 + 2
(4)
(4)
Fig. 2: Forward execution with P(x, x0) ≡(x = x0). The clause x = x0 ←x = x0 + 2
(thick red border) is unsat, corresponding to an assertion violation after one iteration.
constraints over the background theory; in the examples, the clauses are formulated
over linear integer arithmetic (LIA) as the background theory.
Choosing P(x, x0) ≡(x = x0), the program has a bug: the assertion can fail
because after one loop iteration the value of x changes and is no longer equal to x0.
Such a failing execution can be found using forward symbolic execution, running the
program with symbolic initial value x and checking whether any feasible paths to
a failing assertion can be found. The resolution diagram in Figure 2 illustrates how
constrained resolution mimics forward symbolic execution, discovering the bug in two
steps. Each arrow in the figure represents an application of the constrained resolution
rule; for readability, the diagram shows simplified constraints in which equalities have
been inlined. Resolving (1) with (2) yields the derived clause q(x0 +2, 1, x0); resolving
this clause with (4) produces x = x0 ←x = x0 + 2. Since x0 + 2̸ = x0 and the
variables x, x0 are implicitly universally quantified, the clause obtained in this last step
is unsatisfiable; the resolution proof shows that the CHCs (1), (2), (4) are unsatisfiable,
which is equivalent to the program having failing executions.
There is a direct correspondence between the applied resolution steps and the
execution of program statements: the unit clause q(x0, 0, x0) is the symbolic initial
4


q(x0, 0, x0)
q(x0+2, 1, x0)
q(x0+1, 0, x0)
q(x0+3, 1, x0)
· · ·
(1)
(2)
(3)
(2)
x≥x0 ←x= x0
x≥x0 ←x= x0+2
x≥x0 ←x= x0+1
x≥x0 ←x= x0+3
· · ·
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
Fig. 3: Forward execution with P(x, x0) ≡(x ≥x0). Every check holds (green), but
the chain grows indefinitely.
x ≥x0 ←q(x, b, x0)
(4)
x ≥x0+1 ←q(x, b, x0) ∧b=1
x ≥x0−1 ←q(x, 0, x0)
(3)
(2)
x ≥x0−2 ←q(x, b, x0) ∧b=0
(2)
x ≥x0 ←x= x0 ∧b=0
x ≥x0+1 ←x= x0 ∧b=0 ∧b=1
(1)
(1)
Fig. 4: Backward execution with P(x, x0) ≡(x ≥x0). Clauses in dashed nodes are
subsumed by (4). All derivable clauses are satisfiable, proving that the set of clauses
is satisfiable and that the program is safe.
state of the program, while q(x0 + 2, 1, x0) is the symbolic state after one loop iter-
ation. Branches in the symbolic execution, i.e., symbolic states in which multiple
program statements are feasible, correspond to branches in the resolution diagram.
The forward resolution diagram corresponds exactly to the symbolic execution tree of
a program [21].
We now consider the safe case P(x, x0) ≡(x ≥x0), for which a resolution diagram
is shown in Figure 3. We can observe that none of the derived clauses is unsatisfiable,
but the chain of derived clauses grows indefinitely. Forward resolution can conclude
neither safety nor unsafety for this program.
Figure 4 applies backward resolution to the same property P(x, x0) ≡(x ≥x0).
Starting from the goal (4), resolving with (3) yields x ≥x0 + 1 ←q(x, b, x0) ∧b = 1:
for any predecessor state where b = 1, i.e., where the subtraction branch was taken,
x must be at least x0 + 1 to ensure x −1 ≥x0 after the step. Resolving the original
clause with (2) yields x ≥x0 −2 ←q(x, b, x0) ∧b = 0 (dashed node). This clause is
subsumed by (4): the body of (4) is more general, since it places no constraint on b,
and its constraint x ≥x0 entails x ≥x0 −2. Every state that can reach an assertion
violation through the subsumed clause can also reach it through (4), so the subsumed
clause adds no information. The same holds for x ≥x0 −1 ←q(x, 0, x0), obtained
by resolving the second derived clause with (2). We define subsumption formally in
Section 7.
The two checks against (1) (green nodes) confirm that no contradiction can be
derived when taking the initial state into account. Resolving (4) with (1) gives the
5


clause x ≥x0 ←x = x0 ∧b = 0, which holds since x0 ≥x0. Resolving the second
derived clause with (1) gives x ≥x0 + 1 ←x = x0 ∧b = 0 ∧b = 1, which is vacuously
valid since b = 0 ∧b = 1 is unsatisfiable. All derived clauses are either subsumed or
discharged, so backward resolution terminates and proves safety.
Each backward resolution step unwinds the transition relation by one step from
the assertion. This corresponds to k-induction [31, 34]: the base case verifies that the
property holds at the initial state, and the induction step verifies that no new proof
obligations arise beyond those already covered. In this example, two backward steps
suffice (k = 2). We formalize this correspondence in Section 6.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 First-Order Logic
We work in a many-sorted first-order logic setting. A signature is a tuple Σ =
(S, F, P, δ), where S is a set of sorts, F is a set of function symbols, P is a set of
predicate symbols, and δ provides the sort signatures for functions and predicates. We
assume a countably infinite set of sorted variables X. A term is either a variable or the
application of a function symbol to terms of appropriate sorts. An atomic formula (or
atom) is the application of a predicate symbol to terms of appropriate sorts. An atom
is ground if it contains no variables. Formulas are constructed from atoms using stan-
dard logical connectives (¬, ∧, ∨, →) and quantifiers (∀, ∃). A literal is an atom or its
negation. A clause is a disjunction of n ≥0 literals. If n = 0, the clause is the empty
clause (⊥). If n = 1, the clause is a unit clause. A unit clause with a non-negated
literal is positive, and one with a negated literal is negative. A clause that contains
only negated literals is a goal clause. A sentence is a formula with no free-variables,
i.e. every variable is quantified.
A Σ-structure M = (U, I) is given by a domain U = S
S∈S US and an interpretation
I s.t. for any sort S ∈S, I(S) = US, for any predicate symbol P ∈P of type Qn
i=1 Si,
I(P) ⊆Qn
i=1 USi and for any function symbol f ∈F of type Qn
i=1 Si →S, I(f) is in
Qn
i=1 USi →US. If Σ1 ⊆Σ2, we can extend each Σ1-structure M to a Σ2 structure M ′
in the natural way by adding the necessary interpretations of sorts, function symbols
and predicate symbols.
A variable assignment β is a function from X to U mapping variables to elements
of the appropriate sorts. Given a structure M and a variable assignment β, the eval-
uation function valM,β, mapping terms to elements of the domain and formulas to
{true, false} is defined as usual. If F is a formula and valM,β(F) = true, we write
M, β ⊨F. If M, β ⊨F for all variable assignments β, then M ⊨F. Note that the
evaluation of a sentence γ is independent of the variable assignment β as there are no
free variables. If Γ is a set of sentences and M ⊨γ for every γ ∈Γ, we write M ⊨Γ.
A theory T is given by a signature ΣT and a class MT of ΣT -structures. Given
a signature Σ∗⊇ΣT , a set of Σ∗-sentences Γ and a Σ∗-formula F, we write Γ ⊨T F
if for every M ∈MT and every extension M ′ of M to a Σ∗-structure, it holds that
M ′ ⊨F. Throughout the article, we fix a background theory T that includes the
equality operator = and write ⊨as shorthand for ⊨T .
6


2.2 Constrained Horn Clauses (CHCs)
A Constrained Horn Clause (CHC) is a clause with at most one positive literal and a
constraint over the background theory T . In implication form, a CHC is written as:
∀¯x. H ←B ∧φ
where H (the head) is either an atom or ⊥, B (the body) is a possibly empty con-
junction of uninterpreted atoms p1(¯t1) ∧· · · ∧pn(¯tn), φ is a T -constraint, and ¯x is the
tuple of all variables occurring in the clause.
All variables in a CHC are implicitly universally quantified, we usually omit the ∀¯x
prefix for brevity. Whenever two CHCs are involved in a resolution step, we assume
that their variable sets are disjoint. This convention is implicit in all inference rules
presented in this article.
CHCs are classified as follows. A unit clause is a clause H ←B ∧φ in which the
head H and body B together contain exactly one atom. A fact or positive unit clause
is a unit clause whose body contains no atoms, i.e., it has the form H ←φ. A rule is
a CHC whose head is an atom (not ⊥) and whose body contains at least one atom.
A goal is a clause whose head is ⊥, and a negative unit clause is a goal that is also
a unit clause. We sometimes write goals as ψ ←B, where ψ is a constraint, which is
equivalent to ⊥←B ∧¬ψ.
A CHC is linear if its body contains at most one uninterpreted atom, and non-
linear otherwise. A set of CHCs is linear if each of its elements is linear. Non-linear
CHCs arise naturally when encoding programs with function calls: the body of the
clause at the call site contains both the predicate for the called function and the
predicate for the continuation after the call. Non-recursive functions can be inlined to
recover linearity, but recursive functions inherently result in non-linear clauses.
We work with a strict notion of semantics [37] and say that a set C of CHCs is
T -satisfiable (or just satisfiable) if C̸ |= false, i.e., if it is satisfiable in the sense of
first-order logic.
2.3 Calculi and Resolution
The article studies several variants of the classical resolution calculus [36, 38] for
CHCs. In general, we say that a calculus is sound if every derived clause is a logical
consequence of the premises. Deriving the empty clause (⊥) then establishes that the
original set of clauses is unsatisfiable. The calculus is refutation-complete (referred to
as complete in the rest of this article) if, for every unsatisfiable set of clauses, the
empty clause can be derived by finite applications of the calculus rules.
Resolution is an inference system for establishing the unsatisfiability of a set of
clauses. The propositional resolution principle is based on a simple logical observation:
given two clauses C ∨A and D ∨¬A, where A is an atomic proposition, one can infer
the resolvent C ∨D since A and ¬A cannot be true at the same time. If repeatedly
resolving clauses eventually produces the empty clause ⊥, the original set of clauses
is proven unsatisfiable.
7


First-Order Resolution
In first-order logic, the two literals being resolved need not be identical; it suffices
that they can be made identical through unification [36], a syntactic operation that
substitutes variables with terms. Let Aσ denote the application of a substitution σ to
an atom A. A substitution σ is a unifier of two atoms A and A′ if Aσ = A′σ. It is a
most general unifier (MGU), denoted σ = mgu(A, A′), if for every other unifier θ of
A and A′, there exists a substitution γ such that θ = σγ. The first-order resolution
rule generalizes propositional resolution using unification:
C ∨A
D ∨¬A′
(C ∨D)σ
σ = mgu(A, A′)
(5)
where the two premise clauses are assumed to share no variables.
Example 1 Consider the clauses r(x)∨p(f(x), y) and s(y)∨¬p(f(a), b). The atoms p(f(x), y)
and p(f(a), b) have the most general unifier σ = {x 7→a, y 7→b}. Applying (5) to these
clauses using σ yields the resolvent r(a) ∨s(b).
Constrained Resolution
When clauses involve a background theory T , terms may contain theory-interpreted
function symbols (e.g., terms like x + 1, select(a, i)) for which syntactic unification is
not sufficient. Constrained resolution [19] extends first-order resolution by replacing
the MGU computation with an equality constraint: instead of computing a unifier,
the rule adds a constraint that the arguments must be equal, and delegates the task
of checking the satisfiability of this equality to a T -solver, usually an SMT solver. In
the context of CHCs, the rule becomes:
p(¯s) ←B1 ∧φ1
H ←p(¯t) ∧B2 ∧φ2
H ←B1 ∧B2 ∧¯s = ¯t ∧φ1 ∧φ2
(6)
where φ1 and φ2 are T constraints, ¯s = ¯t is the equality constraint, and the clauses
must again not share any variables.
Example 2 Consider the fact q(x, b, x0) ←x=x0 ∧b=0 ((1) from Figure 1) and the rule
q(x′+2, 1, x′
0) ←q(x′, b′, x′
0) ∧b′=0 ((2) with renamed variables). Constrained resolution
matches the head of (1) against the body atom of (2), adding the equality constraints x′=x∧
b′=b ∧x′
0=x0. The resolvent is:
q(x′+2, 1, x′
0) ←x=x0 ∧b=0 ∧x′=x ∧b′=b ∧x′
0=x0 ∧b′=0
Simplifying by substituting the equalities yields the fact q(x0+2, 1, x0) ←⊤, which is the
first derived clause in Figure 2.
8


1
int x := ∗;
2
assume(x > 0);
3
while (x > 0) {
4
if (∗) x := x - 2;
5
else
x := x - 1;
6
}
7
assert(x = 0);
p(x) ←x > 0
(7)
p(x −2) ←p(x) ∧x > 0
(8)
p(x −1) ←p(x) ∧x > 0
(9)
x = 0 ←p(x) ∧x ≤0
(10)
[x 7→x0]
PC : x0 > 0
[x 7→x0]
PC : x0 > 0
∧x0 ≤0
[x 7→x0−2]
PC : x0 > 0
[x 7→x0−2]
PC : x0 > 0
∧x0 ≤2
...
...
[x 7→x0−1]
PC : x0 > 0
...
x=0 ?
x=0 ?
(a) Depth-first symbolic execution.
p(x)
←x > 0
x = 0
←⊥
p(x−2)
←x > 0
x = 2
←x > 0
∧x ≤2
...
...
p(x−1)
←x > 0
...
(10)
(8)
(10)
(9)
(7)
(b) Depth-first forward unit resolution.
Fig. 5: (a) Each node shows a symbolic store and path condition (PC). The PC accu-
mulates branch conditions. At green and red nodes, it is checked whether the property
x = 0 holds in the symbolic state. The leftmost green node has an unsatisfiable PC,
corresponding to exiting the loop immediately, which means that the assertion can-
not be reached on this path. The thick red node shows a feasible path on which the
asserted property can be violated, a counterexample is x0 = 1, x = −1. (b) Clauses
encode the symbolic store as arguments of predicates and the PC as the constraint.
An infeasible path yields clauses with unsatisfiable constraint. The goal clause (10) is
resolved with every fact, including (7) and any resolvents, and the search terminates
if a contradiction is derived (thick red node). Both for symbolic execution and depth-
first forward unit resolution, completeness depends on the strategy: for instance, DFS
would not terminate if the rightmost branch (line 5 in the program, or (9)) were chosen
in every iteration.
3 Symbolic Execution as Resolution
Symbolic execution explores a program by maintaining a symbolic store, which is a
mapping from program variables to symbolic expressions, and a path condition that
accumulates branch conditions along the explored path [21]. At each branch point,
execution splits into one child per branch, producing a tree in which every path from
the root to a leaf represents a class of concrete executions sharing the same control
flow. At assertion points, it is checked whether the asserted property can be violated
in the symbolic program state; a positive result yields a failing program execution.
9


Symbolic execution is illustrated in Figure 5 (a) for a program that is similar
to the motivating example. The initial symbolic program state is represented by the
root of the tree, whereas the intermediate nodes represent possible states reached by
the program during its execution. Nodes with unsatisfiable path condition represent
infeasible paths that cannot occur in concrete program execution. Red nodes mark
feasible symbolic states at which an assertion can be violated. In general, the symbolic
execution tree of a program is finitely branching, but might contain infinite paths
corresponding to non-terminating program executions.
Figure 5 (b) shows the resolution diagram corresponding to the symbolic execu-
tion tree. In the CHC encoding assumed in this example, each predicate represents
the set of states that must hold at a program location, with the predicate arguments
corresponding to the program variables in scope at that location. Facts represent the
program entry points and state preconditions or fixed initial values of variables. Rules
encode transitions between program locations, while goals encode the asserted pro-
gram properties. Comparing the symbolic execution tree with the resolution diagram,
it can be seen that the symbolic program states correspond to CHCs that can be
derived using constrained unit resolution, i.e., the constrained resolution rule restricted
to applications in which at least one of the premises is a unit clause. The initial and
intermediate symbolic program states translate to positive unit clauses, while clauses
without any predicate atoms occur when checking the program assertion. An assertion
failure corresponds to an unsatisfiable clause being derived, i.e., a closed resolution
proof showing that the set of CHCs is unsatisfiable. One difference between symbolic
execution and constrained resolution is that derived clauses do not capture the rela-
tionship between initial and intermediate program states: in symbolic execution, the
value of variable x is expressed in terms of the initial value x0, whereas the derived
clauses only describe the set of reachable intermediate states. It is possible to record the
relationship to initial states also in the resolution diagram by adding ghost variables
storing the initial program state.
Since symbolic execution trees can be large or infinite, different search strate-
gies are applied in symbolic execution to systematically traverse the tree and explore
possible program behavior. Classical strategies include breadth-first search (BFS),
depth-first search (DFS), and iterative deepening. Many other strategies have been
developed in the symbolic execution literature, such as generational search [39] and
concolic execution [40], as well as various heuristic-guided approaches such as KLEE’s
coverage-optimized search [41]. Such strategies translate to constrained resolution. It
can easily be seen, however, that applying constrained resolution in DFS manner is
incomplete for non-linear clauses, whereas fair strategies like BFS are refutationally
complete (Section 4). Using fair saturation of a given set of CHCs in combination with
subsumption criteria, unit resolution is moreover an effective method for proving that
a set of CHCs is satisfiable by constructing the least model of the clauses; in this way,
constrained resolution can often be used to prove the correctness of programs, even
in the presence of unbounded loops. This article surveys some of these calculi and
strategies under the unified view of symbolic execution and resolution over CHCs.
Resolution can also proceed from goals. Applying resolution backward from goals
corresponds to symbolically executing the program in reverse from the error states,
10


deriving proof obligations that must hold at earlier program locations, i.e., back-
ward symbolic execution [26, 34]. Backward symbolic execution can be modeled by
constrained unit resolution, now applying the resolution rule to derive negative unit
clauses starting from the goals. As illustrated in Section 1.1, backward strategies are
often able to show the satisfiability of CHCs in cases where forward strategies diverge.
It is (again) easy to see, however, that constrained unit resolution applied in back-
ward direction is incomplete for non-linear clauses, even for fair application strategies.
A more appropriate version of resolution is SLD resolution known from logic pro-
gramming [27, 29]; in fact, forward resolution corresponds to bottom-up evaluation in
logic programming, while backward resolution corresponds to top-down evaluation.
We study backward resolution in Section 5.
4 Forward Execution by Unit Hyper-Resolution
As mentioned in Section 3, Forward Execution (FE) is a kind of bottom-up evaluation
and corresponds to symbolically executing a program, starting from the initial state.
In this section, we introduce the calculus of unit hyper-resolution with a loose notion
of subsumption, define a fairness criterion for strategies and show that the resulting
algorithm is still refutationally complete. Moreover, we give examples of unsatisfiable
sets of CHCs with the proofs of their unsatisfiability and a way to extract models from
a set of facts that is saturated w.r.t. our subsumption criterion.
4.1 The Algorithm of FE
The core of FE is the inference rule of unit hyper-resolution:
H ←φ ∧
n
^
i=1
Pi(si)
P1(t1) ←ι1
. . .
Pn(tn) ←ιn
H ←φ ∧
n
^
i=1
(ιi ∧ti = si)
(11)
The inference rule is a combination of constrained resolution (Section 2) with hyper-
resolution and guarantees that any consequence obtained by applying it is a fact. It
is well-known that unit hyper-resolution is refutationally complete if it is equipped
with a fair search strategy, meaning that all possible branches are explored and the
strategy does not go down some branch indefinitely [42]. Thus, unit hyper-resolution
is a suitable basis for proving the unsatisfiability of clause sets.
However, we might apply the algorithm to some satisfiable set of clauses and thus,
will never derive a contradiction. In such a case, it would be nice if the algorithm
terminated as well and gave us the result SAT. Intuitively, what we need for this is
a redundancy-criterion that tells us whether facts that can be derived with hyper-
resolution are already entailed by the current set of facts. We can stop deriving facts,
when all facts that can be derived are redundant w.r.t. this criterion. For propositional
logic, there is a simple redundancy criterion: a fact is redundant if it is already an
element of the clause set. This works because for propositional facts, which are just
11


propositional atoms, semantic entailment is equivalent to semantic equality, which in
turn is equivalent to syntactic equality. For first order-logic, this is much more subtle:
consider the (semantically equivalent) facts P(x) ←x ≥0 and P(x) ←x + x ≥0.
Unfortunately, semantic entailment in first order logic is undecidable in general, so we
cannot use it directly in our algorithm. For our purposes, it suffices to assume that we
have a procedure subsumes with the following properties:
1. subsumes takes two arguments, a set of constrained Horn clauses C and some
constrained Horn clause D, and returns a Boolean value {true, false};
2. subsumes always terminates;
3. If D ∈C, then subsumes(C, D) = true;
4. If subsumes(C, D) = true, then V
C∈C C ⊨D.
Informally, these properties of subsumes ensure that subsumes is a sound and decid-
able approximation of semantic entailment that, at the very least, recognizes syntactic
equality/membership. Beyond that, we do not make any assumptions about subsumes
as different versions have different advantages. In Section 7, there is a detailed
discussion about subsumption and we also give examples for such a procedure.
Now that we have all ingredients for our FE-algorithm, we still need a bit of notation
before we can give the algorithm:
• For a set of facts F and a set of rules R, HR(R, F) denotes the set of hyper-
resolvents F obtained by resolving clauses of C with facts of F
• For a set of facts F and a set of rules R, HRsubsumes(R, F) denotes the set {F ∈
HR(R, F) | subsumes(F, F) = false}
• For a set of goal clauses G and a set of facts F, Conf (G, F) denotes the set of
hyper-resolvents ⊥←φ(x) obtained by resolving goals from G with facts from F
s.t. ⊨∃x.φ(x)
We can now give the abstract transition system of FE for sets of CHCs C = F ∪R ∪G
given as the disjoint union of facts F, rules R and goals G:
Unfold
F | R | G ⇒F ∪{F} | R | G
if F ∈HRsubsumes(R, F)
UNSAT
F | R | G ⇒return UNSAT
if Conf (G, F)̸ = ∅
SAT
F | R | G ⇒return SAT
if Conf (G, F) = ∅= HRsubsumes(R, F)
Fig. 6: The Abstract Transition System for FE
4.2 Refutational Completeness of FE
The abstract transition system in Figure 6 gives us a non-deterministic algorithm for
FE, but leaves room for various strategies to decide which facts to add. In this section,
12


we are not interested in the precise strategy, but we do care about the strategy being
fair.
Definition 1 An execution of FE is fair if for every state F
|
R
|
G and F
∈
HRsubsumes(R, F), eventually some state F | R | G′ is reached, where subsumes(F′, F) =
true. A strategy for FE that ensures that every execution is fair is called a fair strategy.
Note that we can easily ensure fair executions by stratifying the clauses of
HRsubsumes(R, F).
As mentioned above, it is a well-known fact that unit hyper-resolution equipped
with a fair strategy is refutationally complete. One might be inclined to use this as
an argument for reasoning that FE equipped with a fair strategy is also refutationally
complete. While this is intuitive, it is a-priori not clear that we did not sacrifice
refutational completeness by adding the redundancy criterion. The following theorem,
however, shows that our intuition is correct:
Theorem 1 If FE is equipped with a fair strategy, then it is refutationally complete, i.e. FE
terminates on C with UNSAT if and only if C is unsatisfiable.
Proof It is clear that if FE terminates with UNSAT, then C is unsatisfiable. We only have to
show that if C is unsatisfiable, then FE terminates with UNSAT if it is run with a fair strategy.
Assume that we are given a set of clauses C = F ∪R ∪G. It follows inductively that
for every fact F that can be derived from C with hyper-resolution, FE reaches a state
F′ | R | G s.t. subsumes(F′, F) = true. Assume that C is unsatisfiable. Since hyper-
resolution is refutationally complete, there is a goal ⊥←Vn
i=1 Pi(xi) ∧ϕ(x1, . . . , xn)
in G and facts F1, . . . , Fn with Fi : PI(xi) ←ιi(xi) that can be derived with hyper-
resolution s.t. ⊨∃x1, . . . , xn
Vn
i=1 ιi(xi) ∧ϕ(x1, . . . , xn). There is a state F∗| R | G s.t.
subsumes(F∗, Fi) = true for all Fi. Pick any a1, . . . , an s.t. ⊨Vn
i=1 ιi(ai) ∧ϕ(a1, . . . , an).
There are facts F ∗
i
∈F∗s.t. F ∗
i
: Pi(xi) ←ι∗
i (xi) and ⊨ι∗
i (ai) for all i. In particular,
⊨∃x1, . . . , xn
Vn
i=1 ι∗
i (xi)∧ϕ(x1, . . . , xn). Thus, Conf (G, F∗) is not empty and FE terminates
with UNSAT.
□
4.3 Constructing Models from FE
Theorem 1 implies that FE is sound, which means that a set of clauses C is unsatisfiable
if FE terminates with UNSAT and satisfiable if FE terminates with SAT. Moreover, the
last state of the algorithm before terminating with SAT allows us to extract a model
of C quite easily.
Definition 2 Let F be a finite set of facts and P a predicate symbol. We define FP = {ι(x) |
P(x) ←ι(x) ∈F}. W.l.o.g., we assume that all ι ∈FP have the same free variables. We
define P(F) = W
ι∈FP ι.
The following theorem is standard and thus, we state it without proof:
13


Theorem 2 Let C = F ∪R∪G be a set of CHCs. If FE terminates with SAT on C and the last
state of FE before terminating is F∗| R | G, then the least model of C is given by interpreting
each P with P(F∗).
5 Backward Execution by Hyper-SLD-Resolution
In Section 4, we considered FE, which derives new facts, until the set of facts either
stabilizes or an error is found. This corresponds to symbolically executing a program
from the start. Symbolic execution can also be performed in the other direction: we
start with an initial set of error states and iteratively add the states that lead to an
error in one step. In the setting of Horn clauses, this corresponds to starting with
an initial set of goals and adding new goals by resolving with rules. This approach
has been successfully employed in the unconstrained case as the calculus underlying
Prolog. However, we can easily adapt this to our setting of CHCs and define the
constrained version of SLD-resolution:
5.1 The Algorithm of BE
Similar to FE there is a single inference rule underlying BE. Generalizing SLD-resolution
from the unconstrained setting (e.g. Prolog) to CHCs yields the following, constrained,
version of SLD:
⊥←P(s) ∧B(t) ∧φ
P(q) ←B′(r) ∧ψ
⊥←B(t) ∧B′(r) ∧φ ∧ψ ∧q = s,
(12)
Similarly to Section 4, we will add a redundancy criterion, so that we can deal with
satisfiable clause-sets. However, in order to prove that the resulting algorithm is still
refutationally complete, we need a slightly more general version of SLD-resolution,
which we call hyper-SLD-resolution:
⊥←
n
^
i=1
Pi(si) ∧B ∧φ
P1(t1) ←A1 ∧ψ1
. . .
Pn(tn) ←An ∧ψn
⊥←B ∧
n
^
i=1
Ai ∧φ ∧
n
^
i=1
(ψi ∧si = ti),
(13)
Note that the SLD-resolution rule is a special instance of hyper-SLD-resolution with
n = 1. On the other hand, every hyper-SLD-derivation can easily be transformed into
an SLD-derivation. Note that, in contrast to hyper-resolution, hyper-SLD-resolution
does not have to yield a unit clause, nor do we have to resolve all atoms of
the body. Hyper-SLD-resolution simply allows us to perform several SLD-resolution
simultaneously, but in a very controlled way.
Similarly to hyper-resolution, SLD resolution is known to be refutationally com-
plete if it is equipped with a fair strategy [42]. In particular, hyper-SLD-resolution
is refutationally complete and therefore, it is a suitable basis for proving the unsat-
isfiability of clause sets. In order to add a redundancy criterion, we assume to have
a procedure subsumes with the same properties as in Section 4. Before giving the
algorithm, we need a little bit of notation:
14


• For a set of goal clauses G and a set of rules R, HSLD(R, G) denotes the set of
resolvents G that are obtained by applying hyper-SLD resolution to goals of G
and rules of R
• For a set of goal clauses G and a set of rules R, HSLDsubsumes(R, G) denotes the
set {G ∈HSLD(R, G) | subsumes(G, G) = false}
• For a set of goal clauses G and a set of facts C, Conf (G, F) is defined as in section 4
We can now give the abstract transition system for BE for a set of CHCs C = F ∪R∪G
given as the disjoint union of facts F, rules R and goals G:
Unfold
F | R | G ⇒F | R | G ∪{G}
if G ∈HSLDsubsumes(R, G)
UNSAT
F | R | G ⇒return UNSAT
if Conf (G, F)̸ = ∅
SAT
F | R | G ⇒return SAT
if Conf (G, F) = ∅= HSLDsubsumes(R, G)
Fig. 7: The Abstract Transition System for BE
Example 3 Consider the following CHCs that define the non-negative even and odd numbers
with the non-linear goal (18):
Even(a) ←a = 0
(14)
Odd(a) ←a = 1
(15)
Even(a) ←Even(b) ∧a = b + 2
(16)
Odd(a) ←Odd(b) ∧a = b + 2
(17)
⊥←Even(a) ∧Odd(b) ∧b + a ≥9
(18)
The clause set is unsatisfiable, since the sum in the goal will eventually exceed 9. Figure 8
shows the backward resolution tree. Resolving Even(a) in (18) with (14) eliminates Even,
yielding the linear goal ⊥←Odd(a) ∧a ≥9. The branch then continues resolving with
(17), eventually deriving a contradiction. The right branch from (16) is also explored but not
shown.
5.2 Refutational Completeness of BE
Similarly to Section 4 the abstract transition system from Figure 7 leaves some freedom
w.r.t. the strategy for which goals to add. Again, the concrete strategy does not matter,
only fairness:
Definition 3 An execution of BE is fair if for every state F
|
R
|
G and G
∈
HSLDsubsumes(R, G), eventually some state F | R | G′ is reached, where subsumes(G′, G) =
true. A strategy for BE that ensures that every execution is fair is called a fair strategy.
15


⊥←Even(a) ∧Odd(b) ∧b+a ≥9
(18)
⊥←Odd(a) ∧a ≥9
(14)
(16)
...
⊥←a=1 ∧a ≥9
⊥←Odd(a) ∧a ≥7
(15)
(17)
⊥←a=1 ∧a ≥7
⊥←Odd(a) ∧a ≥5
(15)
(17)
⊥←a=1 ∧a ≥5
⊥←Odd(a) ∧a ≥3
(15)
(17)
⊥←a=1 ∧a ≥3
⊥←Odd(a) ∧a ≥1
(15)
(17)
⊥←a=1 ∧a ≥1
(15)
Fig. 8: Backward resolution for Example 3.
Note that we can easily ensure fair executions by stratifying the clauses of
HSLDsubsumes(R, G).
Similarly to Section 4, one might find it intuitive that BE is refutationally complete
because SLD-resolution is. Once again, this intuition will turn out to be correct, but
goal clauses, in particular non-linear ones, are more peculiar than facts, so this is not
as trivial as it was for FE.
First, we need to think about sets of goals and consequences of SLD-resolution.
Interestingly enough, SLD-resolution is not monotone w.r.t. logical entailment, as the
following example shows:
Example 4 Assume we have one rule R : P(x) ←Q(x) and the following two goals G1 :
⊥←P(x) ∧P(y) ∧x ≥y and G2 : ⊥←P(x). It holds that ⊨G1 ↔G2 and in particular,
G1 ⊨G2. Let Si be the set of all possible SLD-resolvents of Gi and R. We have that
S1 = {⊥←P(x)∧Q(y)∧x ≥y, ⊥←Q(x)∧P(y)∧x ≥y} and S2 = {⊥←Q(x)}. It follows
that G1, S1 ⊭V
G∈S2 G.
The example above might give some idea, why we failed working with SLD-
resolution and introduced hyper-SLD-resolution. The following lemma shows that
hyper-SLD-resolution is monotone w.r.t. logical entailment:
16


Lemma 3 Let G1 and G2 be sets of goal clauses and R be a set of rules. If G1 ⊨G
for any G ∈G2, then G1, HSLD(R, G1) ⊨G for any G ∈HSLD(R, G). In particular,
G1, HSLDsubsumes(R, G1) ⊨G for any G ∈HSLD(R, G).
Proof Take any goal G : ⊥←B(x) ∧Vn
i=1 Ai(yi) ∧ψ(x, z1, . . . , zn) ∧Vn
i=1 τi(yi, zi) in
HSLD(R, G2). There is a goal G′ : ⊥←B(x) ∧Vn
i=1 Pi(zi) ∧ψ(x, z1, . . . , zn) ∈G2 and rules
R1, . . . , Rn ∈R with Ri : Pi(zi) ←Ai(yi) ∧τi(yi, zi). Pick any model M of the background
theory T that interprets the uninterpreted predicate symbols as well. We must show that
for any a and b1, c1, . . . , bn, cn, there is a goal ⊥←B∗(u) ∧ϕ(u) in G1 ∪HSLD(R, G1) s.t.
M ⊨
 B(a) ∧Vn
i=1 Ai(bi) ∧ψ(a, c1, . . . , cn) ∧Vn
i=1 τi(bi, ci)

→(∃u.B∗(u) ∧ϕ(u)).
If M ⊨¬(B(a) ∧Vn
i=1 Ai(bi) ∧ψ(a, c1, . . . , cn) ∧Vn
i=1 τi(bi, ci)), then we are done.
Assume that M ⊨B(a) ∧Vn
i=1 Ai(bi) ∧ψ(a, c1, . . . , cn) ∧Vn
i=1 τi(bi, ci). Since G1 ⊨
G′, there is a goal G′′ : ⊥←B′′(u) ∧ϕ′′(u) ∈G1 with M ⊨B(a) ∧Vn
i=1 Pi(ci) ∧
ψ(a, c1, . . . , cn) →∃u.B′′(u) ∧ϕ′′(u). Since B′′ consists of uninterpreted predicate sym-
bols only, it follows that the witness of u uses only elements of a, c1, . . . , cn. Thus,
w.l.o.g., G′′ has the form ⊥←B′′(v, u1, . . . , un) ∧ϕ′′(v, u1, . . . , un) and M ⊨B(a) ∧
Vn
i=1 Pi(ci) ∧ψ(a, c1, . . . , cn) →B′′(a, c1, . . . , cn) ∧ϕ′′(a, c1, . . . , cn). In particular, M ⊨
ψ(a, c1, . . . , cn) →ϕ(a, c1, . . . , cn). We are almost done. The only problem is that B′′
might contain the predicate symbol Pi s.t. B′′(a, c1, . . . , cn) contains Pi(ci). However, we
can use one application of the hyper-SLD-rule to cut all such atoms with the respective
rule Ri. Note that we do not necessarily cut all atoms containing Pi(x), but only those
where x is substituted with ci. After applying this resolution, we obtain a goal ⊥←
B∗(u)∧ϕ(u, v1, . . . , vn)∧Vn
i=1 τi(wi, vi) with M ⊨
 B(a) ∧Vn
i=1 Pi(ci) ∧ψ(a, c1, . . . , cn)

→
 B∗(a, c1, . . . , cn) ∧ϕ(a, c1, . . . , cn) ∧Vn
i=1 τi(bi, ci)

.
□
Theorem 4 If BE is run with a fair strategy, then it is refutationally complete, i.e. BE
terminates with UNSAT on input C if and only if C is unsatisfiable.
Proof It is clear that if BE terminates with UNSAT, then C is unsatisfiable. We only need to
show that if a clause set is unsatisfiable, then BE terminates with UNSAT.
Assume that C is unsatisfiable and define the sets Gi inductively: Gi = G, Gi+1 = Gi ∪
HSLD(R, Gi). There is some i0, a goal G : ⊥←Vn
k=1 Pk(xk) ∧ϕ(x1, . . . , xn) in Gi0 and
facts Fk : Pk(xk) ←ιk(xk) in F s.t. ⊨∃x1, . . . , xn.(Vn
k=1 ιk(xk ∧ϕ(x1, . . . , xn)). From
Lemma 3 it follows that every fair execution of BE reaches a state F | R | G∗s.t. G∗⊨G.
Pick any model M and any a1, . . . , ak s.t. M ⊨Vn
k=1 ιk(ak) ∧ϕ(a1, . . . , an). There is a goal
G∗: ⊥←Vm
k=1 Qk(yk) ∧ψ(y1, . . . , ym) in G∗s.t. M ⊨(Vn
k=1 Pk(ak) ∧ϕ(a1, . . . , an)) →
∃y1, . . . , ym. Vm
k=1 Qk(yk)∧ψ(y1, . . . , ym). It follows that every Qk is some Pl and that there
is some substitution θ mapping yk to xl s.t. ψ∗(x1, . . . , xn) ≡ψθ has the property that
M ⊨ϕ(a1, . . . , an) →ψ∗(a1, . . . , an). By hyper-resolving every Qk with the appropriate Pl,
we obtain the clause ⊥←Vk
i=1 ιk(xk) ∧ψ(y1, . . . , ym) ∧Vm
k=1 yk = ykθ. It follows that
M ⊨∃x1, . . . , xn, y1, . . . , ym.(Vk
i=1 ιk(xk) ∧ψ(y1, . . . , ym) ∧Vm
k=1 yk = ykθ). Since M was
arbitrary, BE terminates with UNSAT.
□
17


5.3 Constructing Models from BE
In section 4, we were able to give a nice method to construct models from saturated
sets of facts after executing FE. Maybe surprisingly, this is much more intricate for BE.
The two main factors contributing to this are non-linearity of goals and the potential
non-existence of greatest fixed points. Assume that we are given a set of CHCs C =
F ∪R ∪G.
One view of FE is that we under-approximate the set of states that is necessarily
contained in every solution of C by deriving facts until the set of facts stabilizes,
meaning that we reached the least fixed point of F ∪R. If we have not derived a
contradiction in the process, then the least fixed point of F ∪R is a model of C.
Moreover, we can write it down explicitly as the disjunction of the facts. This is
possible because the facts are linear and therefore do not display any dependencies
between different predicate symbols.
If we instead use BE, then we over-approximate the set of states that are necessarily
not contained in any solution of of C by deriving new goals. Intuitively, we aim for the
greatest fixed point of C. However, there does not have to be a greatest fixed point of
C and, more importantly, BE can also terminate with SAT on a clause set if it does not
possess a greatest fixed point. This begs the question, which fixed point we would even
like to define. The obstacle that prevents us from constructing any solution explicitly
is non-linearity: A goal like ⊥←P(x) ∧Q(x) tells us that P and Q are disjoint in
any model. In particular, the interpretations of P and Q depend on each other and we
cannot define them separately as it was the case with FE. Nonetheless, if the saturated
set of goals only contains linear clauses, then we can extract a model in a way that is
dual to what we did with FE.
Definition 4 Let G be a finite set of linear goals and P a predicate symbol. We define
GP = {ϕ(x) | ⊥←P(x) ∧ϕ(x) ∈G}. W.l.o.g., we assume that all ϕ ∈GP have the same free
variables. We define P(G) = V
ϕ∈GP ¬ϕ.
The following theorem is standard and thus, we state it without proof:
Theorem 5 Let C = F ∪R ∪G be a set of CHCs. If BE terminates with SAT on C and the
last state of BE before terminating is F | R | G∗s.t. every goal in G is a linear clause, then
the greatest model of C is given by interpreting each P with P(G∗).
The theorem above only deals with the case of linear goals. We leave the question
of model construction in the general case for future research.
6 Backward Execution vs. k-Induction
So far, we have only considered CHCs as representation for programs and imposed no
syntactic restrictions on them to run FE or BE. However, there is a plethora of other
ways to represent programs, some of which allow us to employ methods to prove their
safety that might not be suited for arbitrary sets of CHCs. In this section, we present
18


k-induction for a restricted fragment of CHC-sets and show that BE can be considered
to be a natural extension of k-induction in the setting of arbitrary sets of CHCs.
The notion k-induction was first introduced in [31] for transition systems. Transi-
tion systems can easily be translated to set of CHCs, but we can also simply define
k-induction for sets of CHCs directly if we restrict the sets of CHCs that we consider.
Assume that we are given a set of CHCs C of the following form:
{P(x) ←ι(x), P(y) ←P(x) ∧τ(x, y), ⊥←P(x) ∧β(x)}.
(19)
Note that we can translate any transition system into a set of the form (19). We can
now verify that C is safe by finding some k > 0 s.t. the following two statements hold:
Base case All paths of length at most k starting from an initial state are safe.
Induction step Every path of length k + 1 whose prefix of length k is safe is also safe.
More formally, these two statements correspond to the following logical formulas:
⊨
 
ι(x1) ∧
k−1
^
i=1
τ(xi, xi+1)
!
→
k^
i=1
¬β(xi)
(20)
⊨
 k^
i=1
¬β(xi) ∧
k^
i=1
τ(xi, xi+1)
!
→¬β(xk+1)
(21)
Evidently, k-induction is sound: If no error-state is reachable in k steps and whenever
we have a chain of k safe states, every state we add to the chain is safe as well, then
every reachable state is safe. The motivating example in Figure 4 illustrates this with
k = 2.
While this formulation is straightforward for clause sets that have the form of (19),
it is difficult to define a similar satisfiability criterion for more general cases. Although
non-linearity in rules can be dealt with, there is no formulation of k-induction for
non-linear goals that we are aware of.
Let us now go back to BE: Applying BE to C for k-steps yields a set of goals of
the form Gk = {⊥←P(x1) ∧Vl−1
i=1 τ(xi, xi+1) ∧β(xl) | l ≤k}. Note the following:
Checking that Conf (Gk, F) = ∅corresponds precisely to checking that (20) holds.
Moreover, if HSLDsubsumes(R, Gk) = ∅, then this implies that (21) holds. If we require
that subsumes is not only sound, but also complete for this special fragment of goal
clauses, then the converse holds: If (21) holds, then HSLDsubsumes(R, Gk) = ∅. Thus,
in this case, we have a precise match between k-induction and BE, which justifies our
view to consider BE as a generalization of k-induction in the case or arbitrary Horn
clauses.
Note that this connection between k-induction and BE is not new and was already
observed in the paper introducing k-induction [31]. A similar observation was made
by Chalupa and Strejˇcek [34] for backward symbolic execution, and by Bjørner et
al. [37] who recast k-induction as a fold-unfold transformation on linear Horn clauses.
However, classical k-induction and these formulations are restricted to linear clauses.
19


Backward resolution is not: it applies to arbitrary sets of CHCs, including non-linear
ones.
7 Subsumption
In Section 4 and Section 5, we have assumed to have a procedure subsumes that
is a sound and decidable approximation of logical entailment between a finite set of
clauses and another clause. The reason we did this is twofold: On the one hand, we
would like to be able to check for logical entailment, in order to add some redundancy
criterion to our algorithms and be able to derive that some clause set is satisfiable. On
the other hand, we cannot work with logical entailment directly as first-order logic is
famously undecidable. In this section, we will give examples of decidable subsumption
criteria with varying strength, meaning that some are better approximations of logical
entailment than others at the expense of being more complicated. Each of these criteria
naturally leads to a procedure subsumes with the desired properties from Section 4.
Moreover, we will see that there are notions of subsumption that are not only sound,
but also complete if we only consider (sets of) facts or (sets of) goals.
Starting from syntactic equality, the first non-trivial version of subsumption that
we consider is commonly known as θ-subsumption:
Definition 5 Let C1 and C2 be two constrained Horn clauses with Ci : Hi ←Bi ∧ϕi. C1
θ-subsumes C2 if there is a variable substitution θ with the following properties:
1. H1θ ⊇H2
2. B1θ ⊆B2
3. ⊨ϕ2 →ϕ1θ
Note that θ-subsumption only deals with the question of whether one clause C1
entails another clause C2. We can easily lift it to our setting, where we ask the question
if a whole clause set C entails some clause C, by checking if there is any clause C′ in C
s.t. C′ θ-subsumes C. Clearly, if C θ-subsumes C, then C ⊨C. However, the converse
is not necessarily the case:
Example 5 Consider the clauses C1 : ⊥←E(z) ∧z%2 = 1 and C2 : ⊥←E(x) ∧E(y) ∧
(x + y)%2 = 1. Then, C1 ⊨C2, but C1 does not subsume C2 because for no substitution θ
does it hold that (x + y)%2 = 1 ⊨(z%2 = 1)θ. Informally, one could say that if the sum of
two numbers is odd, then one of summands is odd as well, but you do not know which one
beforehand.
The example above illustrates the potential shortcomings of plain subsumption: It
is uniform in the sense that there has to be one θ that works for all cases. We can use
this as a motivation to define more general versions of subsumption that cover more
cases, where uniformity is too much to ask for:
20


Definition 6 Let C1 and C2 be constrained Horn clauses with Ci : Hi ←Bi ∧ϕi. A
substitution θ is C1-C2-feasible if the following holds
1. H1θ ⊇H2
2. B1θ ⊆B2
Let Θ(C1, C2) be the set of all C1-C2-feasible substitutions. C1 disjunctively subsumes C2 if
it holds that
⊨ϕ2 →
_
θ∈Θ(C1,C2)
ϕ1θ
Note that Θ(C1, C2) is finite and the formulas above are well-formed. Again, we
can lift disjunctive subsumption to the our setting by checking it for each clause in
the set and it holds that if C disjunctively subsumes C, then C ⊨C, meaning that
disjunctive subsumption is sound. Moreover, the notion disjunctive subsumption is
strictly stronger than regular subsumption as the Example 5 shows. However, there
are still some cases, where a clause C is entailed by a clause set C, but C does not
disjunctively subsume C. Moreover, there are cases that seem easy enough that we
would want our notion of subsumption to hold. Consider the following example:
Example 6 Consider the clauses C1 : P(x) ←Q(x) ∧0 ≤x ≤7, C2 : P(y) ←Q(y) ∧2 ≤y ≤
10 and C3 : P(z) ←Q(z) ∧0 ≤z ≤10. It holds that C1 ∧C2 ⊨C3, but neither C1 nor C2
(disjunctively) subsume C3.
In the example above, the problem is not uniformity, but that the conjunction of
the clauses C1 and C2 contains more information than C1 and C2 separately and both
pieces of information are necessary to prove the entailment. We can easily fix this by
extending our notion of disjunctive subsumption:
Definition 7 Let C∗: H∗←B∗∧ϕ∗be a constrained Horn clause and C a finite set
constrained Horn clauses with C : HC ←BC ∧ϕC for C in C. C disjunctively subsume C∗if
it holds that
⊨ϕ∗→
_
C∈C
_
θ∈Θ(C,C∗)
ϕCθ
Note that this definition coincides with the previous definition of disjunctive sub-
sumption if n = 1. Thus, we replace the previous definition of disjunctive subsumption
with this more general one. Disjunctive subsumption is still sound and it captures
very natural cases like Example 6. However, there are still examples of clause sets that
logically entail another clause, but where disjunctive subsumption fails:
Example 7 Consider the clauses C1 : P(x) ←x = 0, C2 : Q(y) ←P(y) and C3 : Q(x) ←x =
0. Then C1 ∧C2 ⊨C3, but {C1, C2} does not disjunctively subsume C3 since Θ(C1, C3) =
Θ(C2, C3) = ∅and the constraint of C3 is satisfiable.
21


The example above shows that any version of subsumption defined so far does not
fully capture logical entailment. Moreover, as mentioned above, any attempt to fully
capture logical entailment while staying decidable is doomed to fail. Thus, we will
not try to refine our notion subsumption anymore. We close this section by proving
that disjunctive subsumption as defined above, while generally for all clause sets, is
complete if we restrict the setting to goals or facts:
Proposition 6 Let F be finite set of facts and F ∗some fact. It holds that F ⊨F ∗if and
only if F disjunctively subsumes F ∗.
Proof Assume that F ⊨F ∗and that F ∗has the form P(x) ←ι∗(x). There are two cases: If
⊨∀x.¬ι∗(x), then F trivially disjunctively subsumes F ∗. Otherwise, we can assume w.l.o.g.,
that all F ∈F have the form P(xF ) ←ιF (xF ), i.e. they all have the same predicate in the
head. Since F ⊨F ∗, it holds that for any model M and any a, there is some F ∈F with
M ⊨ι∗(a) →ιF (a). Since M and a were arbitrary, it follows that ⊨ι∗(x) →W
F ∈F ιF (x).
By defining the substitution θF = {xF 7→x}, this is equivalent to ⊨ι∗→W
F ∈F ιF θF , which
fits our definition of disjunctive subsumption.
□
Proposition 7 Let G be a finite set of goal clauses and G∗some goal clause. It holds that
G ⊨G∗if and only if G disjunctively subsume G∗.
Proof Assume that every goal G in G has the form ⊥←BG ∧ψG. Assume that G ⊨G∗and
that G∗has the form ⊥←B∗(x) ∧ϕ∗(x). Since G ⊨G∗, it holds that for every model M
and every a, there is some goal G : ⊥←BG(y) ∧ψG(y) ∈G with M ⊨(B∗(a) ∧ϕ∗(a)) →
∃y(BG(y) ∧ψG(y)). Since BG contains only uninterpreted predicate symbols, there is G-
G∗-feasible substitution θ s.t. M ⊨(B∗(a) ∧ϕ∗(a)) →(BG ∧ψG)θ(a). Since M and a
were arbitrary, it holds that ⊨(B∗∧ϕ∗) →W
G∈G
W
θ∈Θ(G,G∗)(BG ∧ψG)θ. In particular,
⊨ϕ∗→W
G∈G
W
θ∈Θ(G,G∗) ψGθ, which proves the claim.
□
8 Symbolic Execution and Incorrectness Logic
Incorrectness logic is a program logic to reason about failing program executions; it
has been proposed as a formalism for contracts documenting cases in which a function
is supposed to terminate with an error, or to concisely represent counterexamples to
correctness [35]. Incorrectness logic can be seen as the dual of Hoare logic.
{p(¯x)} S {q(¯x)}
(22)
[p(¯x)] S [q(¯x)]
(23)
For a Hoare triple (22) to be valid, it has to be the case that the postcondition q(¯x)
holds in every final state ¯x′ of the statement S when started in a state ¯x satisfying the
precondition p(¯x) [43]; in other words q(¯x) is implied by the strongest postcondition of
p(¯x) and S. In contrast, an incorrectness logic triple (23) is valid if for every state ¯x′
satisfying the result q(¯x), there is some state ¯x satisfying the presumption p(¯x) from
22


which the statement S terminates in state ¯x′; the result q(¯x) has to imply the strongest
postcondition. If the semantics of the statement S is represented as a formula TS(¯x, ¯x′)
over two copies of the state variables, then the meaning of a Hoare triple is expressed
by (24) and the meaning of an incorrectness triple by (25):
∀¯x.∀¯x′. p(¯x) ∧TS[¯x, ¯x′] →q(¯x′)
(24)
∀¯x′. q(¯x′) →∃¯x. p(¯x) ∧TS[¯x, ¯x′]
(25)
Since (24) is Horn, it can naturally be encoded in the form of CHCs, making it
possible to infer pre- and postconditions using CHC solvers. It is therefore tempting to
ask whether a similar encoding is possible for incorrectness logic, so that the existing
machinery of CHC can be put to use also for reasoning about incorrectness?
The existential quantifier in (25) indicates that such an encoding is not straightfor-
ward. Indeed, it is easy to see that in the special case of a statement S being injective,
i.e., ∀¯x, ¯x′
1, ¯x′
2. TS(¯x, ¯x′
1) ∧TS(¯x, ¯x′
2) →¯x′
1 = ¯x′
2, formula (25) can be expressed as a
CHC. In the general case, to express (25) an extended language of Horn clauses with
existential quantifiers would be needed, which is beyond the scope of CHC and cannot
be handled by existing CHC solvers.
We would like to advocate an alternative perspective on the nature of incorrect-
ness logic. For this, observe that no abstraction takes place in the translation from a
Hoare triple (22) to a Horn formula (24), the formula expresses exactly the semantics
of the program and the meaning of pre- and postconditions. It is then not clear why
different translations to logic would be needed for correctness vs. incorrectness reason-
ing, instead the reasoning approach itself can be replaced. It is well-known that the
construction of Hoare logic proofs can be automated with the help of model construc-
tion for sets of CHCs. We claim that the construction of incorrectness proofs can be
supported through clausal proofs about CHCs, for instance with the help of the proof
rules introduced in this article:
Logic
Reasoning used for automation
Hoare logic
Model construction for sets of CHCs
Incorrectness logic
Proof construction for sets of CHCs
Consider a forward proof rule for CHCs corresponding to (22), in which postS is
some procedure approximating the post-image of φ under the statement S:
p(¯x) ←φ[¯x]
q(¯x′) ←p(¯x) ∧TS[¯x, ¯x′]
q(¯x′) ←ψ[¯x′]
ψ = postS(φ)
(26)
For the proof rule to be sound, i.e., for the entailment
{∀¯x. (p(¯x) ←φ[¯x]), ∀¯x, ¯x′. (q(¯x′) ←p(¯x) ∧TS[¯x, ¯x′])} |= ∀¯x′. (q(¯x′) ←ψ[¯x′])
(27)
to hold, it is necessary that the constraints φ[¯x], ψ[¯x′], TS[¯x, ¯x′] are in relationship:
23


Lemma 8 Proof rule (26) is sound if and only if ψ[¯x′] ⇒∃¯x. φ[¯x] ∧TS(¯x, ¯x′).
Proof “⇒” Assume that (27) holds, which means that it holds in particular for structures
satisfying p(¯x) ↔φ[¯x] and q(¯x′) ↔∃¯x. φ[¯x] ∧TS(¯x, ¯x′). The antecedent of (27) is valid in
such structures, while the consequence is ∀¯x′. ψ[¯x′] →∃¯x. φ[¯x] ∧TS(¯x, ¯x′).
“⇒” Observe that the entailment holds when adding ∀¯x′. ψ[¯x′] →∃¯x. φ[¯x] ∧TS(¯x, ¯x′) to
the antecedent.
□
The necessary and sufficient condition ψ[¯x′] ⇒∃¯x. φ[¯x] ∧TS(¯x, ¯x′) for (26) to
be sound corresponds to the incorrectness formula (25). This implies that forward
symbolic execution proofs, such as the ones constructed in Section 4, can directly be
translated to proofs in incorrectness logic by using the derived constrained positive unit
clauses (facts) as the result of incorrectness triples. Since backward proofs (Section 5)
can be translated to forward proofs, the same holds for backward symbolic execution.
This kind of reasoning is not limited to ground proofs, since symbolic execution
naturally produces proofs that do not refer to concrete values, and hence gives rise
to symbolic incorrectness proofs as well. CHC proofs can also be extended with the
more specialized proof rules that have been introduced for incorrectness logic. As an
example, consider the following “Backwards Variant” incorrectness rule:
[p(n) ∧n ≥0] S [p(n + 1) ∧n ≥0]
[p(0)] while (*) S [∃n. p(n) ∧n ≥0] n : Z fresh
(Backwards Variant)
The rule expresses that a loop while (*) S can be accelerated if it can be shown that
p(n) is a “variant” of the loop; p(n) is required to decrease when executing the loop
body S backwards. We can formulate a corresponding unit propagation rule on CHCs,
which enables the calculus to generalize a fact p(¯x) ←φ[¯x, 0] to p(¯x) ←φ[¯x, n]∧n ≥0
if it can be shown, through a side condition, that φ[¯x, n] is a variant of S:
p(¯x) ←φ[¯x, 0]
p(¯x′) ←p(¯x) ∧TS[¯x, ¯x′]
p(¯x) ←φ[¯x, n] ∧n ≥0
n : Z fresh,
φ[¯x, n + 1] ∧n ≥0 ⇒postS(φ[¯x, n])
(28)
A more refined version of the proof rule could recover the condition φ[¯x, n+1]∧n ≥0
⇒postS(φ[¯x, n]) from the clausal proof itself. Whenever a proof contains a derivation
of p(¯x) ←φ[¯x, k + 1] from p(¯x) ←φ[¯x, k], for some k ∈N, it can be checked whether
the derivation can be generalized to a variable n. In this case, thanks to Lemma 8,
the derivation can be lifted to produce the more general consequence p(¯x) ←φ[¯x, n]∧
n ≥0. Experimenting with calculi of this kind is left as future work.
9 Experiments
We implemented forward and backward symbolic execution in Eldarica [10] and
evaluate them against Eldarica’s CEGAR engine on benchmarks from the CHC-
COMP benchmark suite [44].
24


Table 1: Number of satisfiable / unsatisfiable instances solved per category.
Best values for each category across configurations are shown in bold.
Category
#
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
FEDFS
BEBFS
ADT-LIA
1131
76 /
158
55 / 165
11 / 155
–
20 / 148
ADT-LIA-Arrays
3607
2256 / 1123
2254 / 1122
1498 / 1070
–
2030 / 1090
BV
96
33 /
42
31 /
43
8 /
26
–
2 /
33
LIA
1287
633 /
378
571 / 378
91 / 365
–
166 / 293
LIA-Arrays
1738
1029 /
684
1029 / 684
709 / 622
–
955 / 665
BV-Lin
512
97 /
152
74 / 152
45 / 148
33 / 99
28 / 152
LIA-Lin
1406
540 /
293
466 / 293
151 / 282
56 / 48
195 / 262
LIA-Lin-Arrays
139
53 /
23
48 /
23
17 /
22
12 / 11
14 /
20
LRA-Lin
277
27 /
13
30 /
13
34 /
13
2 / 4
28 /
13
9.1 Setup
We evaluate five configurations:
• CEGAR: Eldarica’s CEGAR engine with default settings.
• CEGAR−: Eldarica’s CEGAR engine with interpolation abstraction disabled.
• FEBFS: Forward execution (FE, Section 4) via constrained positive unit hyper-
resolution with BFS strategy.
• FEDFS: Forward execution with DFS strategy. This configuration only supports
linear CHCs.
• BEBFS: Backward execution (BE, Section 5) via SLD resolution with BFS strategy.
The symbolic execution configurations do not yet implement subsumption beyond
checking whether an identical resolvent already exists.
We evaluate on nine categories from the CHC-COMP 2026 benchmark suite [44].1
The categories are: ADT-LIA, ADT-LIA-Arrays, BV, BV-Lin, LIA, LIA-Arrays, LIA-
Lin, LIA-Lin-Arrays, and LRA-Lin. Categories suffixed with “Lin” contain only linear
CHCs.
Experiments were run on the Pelle cluster at UPPMAX, Uppsala University
(80 nodes, AMD EPYC 9454P 48-core Zen4, 768 GB RAM per node). Each benchmark
was allocated 1 CPU core and 6 GB of memory, with a wall-time limit of 180 seconds.
9.2 Results and Discussion
Table 1 summarizes the number of satisfiable and unsatisfiable instances solved by each
configuration. Tables 2 and 3 show pairwise comparison matrices: each entry shows
the number of satisfiable/unsatisfiable instances solved by the row configuration but
not the column configuration.
The results show that forward and backward symbolic execution are often com-
plementary: each strategy solves instances the other cannot in many categories. For
satisfiability, BEBFS is often more effective than FEBFS. While we expected symbolic exe-
cution to solve some unsatisfiable instances that CEGAR cannot, in many categories
1https://github.com/chc-comp/chc-comp-2026
25


Table 2: Comparison matrices for non-linear categories. Each entry shows sat/unsat
instances solved by the row configuration but not by the column configuration.
ADT-LIA
ADT-LIA-Arrays
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
BEBFS
CEGAR
—
22/1
65/13
56/14
CEGAR−
1/8
—
44/14
35/17
FEBFS
0/10
0/4
—
0/10
BEBFS
0/4
0/0
9/3
—
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
BEBFS
CEGAR
—
2/1
769/56
226/34
CEGAR−
0/0
—
767/56
224/34
FEBFS
11/3
11/4
—
20/8
BEBFS
0/1
0/2
552/28
—
BV
LIA
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
BEBFS
CEGAR
—
3/0
25/17
31/10
CEGAR−
1/1
—
23/17
29/10
FEBFS
0/1
0/0
—
7/2
BEBFS
0/1
0/0
1/9
—
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
BEBFS
CEGAR
—
68/1
542/25
469/86
CEGAR−
6/1
—
480/25
408/86
FEBFS
0/12
0/12
—
41/76
BEBFS
2/1
3/1
116/4
—
LIA-Arrays
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
BEBFS
CEGAR
—
0/0
320/62
74/19
CEGAR−
0/0
—
320/62
74/19
FEBFS
0/0
0/0
—
2/5
BEBFS
0/0
0/0
248/48
—
Table 3: Comparison matrices for linear categories. Entry format as in Table 2.
BV-Lin
LIA-Lin
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
FEDFS
BEBFS
CEGAR
—
24/0
67/7
78/56
70/3
CEGAR−
1/0
—
47/7
54/56
46/3
FEBFS
15/3
18/3
—
12/53
33/3
FEDFS
14/3
13/3
0/4
—
22/5
BEBFS
1/3
0/3
16/7
17/58
—
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
FEDFS
BEBFS
CEGAR
—
80/3
409/42
484/245
360/49
CEGAR−
6/3
—
338/41
413/245
294/49
FEBFS
20/31
23/30
—
95/234
72/27
FEDFS
0/0
3/0
0/0
—
13/1
BEBFS
15/18
23/18
116/7
152/215
—
LIA-Lin-Arrays
LRA-Lin
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
FEDFS
BEBFS
CEGAR
—
5/0
37/1
41/12
39/3
CEGAR−
0/0
—
33/1
36/12
34/3
FEBFS
1/0
2/0
—
5/12
3/2
FEDFS
0/0
0/0
0/1
—
0/2
BEBFS
0/0
0/0
0/0
2/11
—
CEGAR
CEGAR−
FEBFS
FEDFS
BEBFS
CEGAR
—
0/0
4/0
25/9
3/0
CEGAR−
3/0
—
5/0
28/9
5/0
FEBFS
11/0
9/0
—
32/9
8/0
FEDFS
0/0
0/0
0/0
—
0/0
BEBFS
4/0
3/0
2/0
26/9
—
some satisfiable instances could only be solved by the symbolic execution configura-
tions. For instance, 11 satisfiable instances in ADT-LIA-Arrays and 20 in LIA-Lin
could only be solved by FEBFS.
DFS (FEDFS) solves fewer instances overall; however, it occasionally solves unsatis-
fiable instances that other strategies cannot. This is because DFS can find refutations
deep within the branches it explores, but it can also get stuck exploring an infinitely
deep branch that does not lead to a refutation.
Overall, the results demonstrate that symbolic execution of CHCs, even with-
out subsumption beyond syntactic identity checks and without search heuristics, is a
26


viable approach for CHC solving, while being substantially simpler to implement than
CEGAR or IC3-based algorithms.
10 Related Work
We discuss the most closely related work on CHC solving algorithms and on resolution
in logic programming.
10.1 CHC Solving and Software Model Checking
Most CHC solvers rely on algorithms that synthesize invariants. Z3/Spacer [12]
extends the IC3 framework [14] to CHCs, maintaining over-approximate procedure
summaries computed using interpolation, and under-approximate reachability facts
computed using model-based projection. Eldarica [10] implements CEGAR with
predicate abstraction [15]. Golem [11] supports several engines, including transition
power abstraction (TPA) [18]. TPA maintains a sequence of relations where the n-th
relation over-approximates up to 2n transition steps, computed using interpolation,
allowing safety checks at exponentially increasing depth.
Constrained resolution, as studied in this article, avoids invariant synthesis. In
forward execution, derived clauses encode reachable states; in backward execution,
they encode proof obligations. Eldarica implements both forward and backward
symbolic execution of CHCs, currently without subsumption beyond syntactic identity
after simplification. Golem implements forward symbolic execution for linear CHCs,
following the description in [45]. In [45], Abdulla et al. build on top of the symbolic
execution engine in Eldarica formalized in the present article, adding graph neural
network-guided search heuristics.
Bjørner et al. discusses both backward and forward derivations for CHCs, and
recast k-induction as a fold/unfold transformation on linear CHCs [37]. Backward
resolution with subsumption, as studied in this article, generalizes k-induction and
applies to non-linear clauses without requiring a separate transformation step.
Acceleration-driven clause learning [16], implemented in the LoAT tool [13] is a
calculus for linear CHCs that is based on resolution. Loop acceleration techniques
compute quantifier-free formulas characterizing the N-fold closure of a recursive clause,
and the resulting accelerated clauses are added to the clause set. Resolution with
an accelerated clause simulates arbitrarily many applications of the original recursive
clause in a single step. Our approach shares the property with acceleration-driven
clause learning of being refutationally complete and can prove satisfiability, but does
not necessarily terminate.
In the context of software model checking, [24] compares two approaches for
predicate extraction in CEGAR: one based on Craig interpolation and one based
on symbolic execution using strongest postconditions. The symbolic execution-based
approach can be competitive, consistent with our finding that constrained resolution
can be effective without interpolation.
27


10.2 Resolution and Logic Programming
Constrained resolution [19] extends first-order resolution [36] by replacing syntactic
unification with equality constraints over a background theory, delegating satisfiability
checks to a constraint solver. In theory resolution [46], specialized reasoning procedures
are instead incorporated directly into the resolution rule, which resolves on sets of
literals whose conjunction is determined T-unsatisfiable by a decision procedure for
the theory T. A survey of CHC analysis and transformation techniques from the
constraint logic programming perspective is given in [47].
Forward execution corresponds to bottom-up evaluation of logic programs, and
backward execution to top-down evaluation. SLD resolution [27, 29], the computa-
tional mechanism of Prolog, is a restriction of backward resolution to definite clauses
with a selection rule. In Prolog, the goal is typically to compute answer substitutions
for a query; extracting invariants or counterexamples is not a concern. In our setting,
we are also interested in models and refutation proofs. Models of the CHCs serve as
correctness proofs for programs, and refutation proofs correspond to concrete failing
executions that can be used as proofs of bugs and for test-case generation. CHCs
also involve a background theory, which makes semantic entailment between clauses
undecidable in general and requires the subsumption approximations described in
Section 7.
11 Conclusion
We studied constrained resolution as a framework for symbolic execution of CHCs.
Several directions remain for future work. Concolic execution [40] is a natural strat-
egy to consider, but adapting it to CHCs is not straightforward: unlike programs,
CHCs do not have a fixed notion of input variables to concretize. One option is to
strengthen constraints when the SMT solver cannot decide satisfiability within a time
limit. Other search strategies such as iterative deepening and generational search [39]
could be explored. In many cases checking subsumption could be useful, but the cost
of subsumption checks depends on the background theory and can be expensive in
practice. Bidirectional strategies that combine forward and backward execution could
also be effective, since the two directions are complementary in practice. We hope that
the unified view of symbolic execution and resolution over CHCs developed in this
article can serve as a foundation for exploring these and other directions.
Acknowledgements.
The work was supported by the Swedish Research Council
through grants 2021-06327 and 2025-06185, and by the Ethereum Foundation under
grant FY25-2124. The experimental evaluation was enabled by resources in project
UPPMAX 2026/1-126 provided by Uppsala University at UPPMAX.
References
[1] S. Kalra, S. Goel, M. Dhawan, S. Sharma, ZEUS: Analyzing Safety of Smart
Contracts, in 25th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium,
28


NDSS 2018, San Diego, California, USA, February 18-21, 2018 (The Inter-
net Society, 2018). URL https://www.ndss-symposium.org/wp-content/uploads/
2018/02/ndss2018 09-1 Kalra paper.pdf
[2] K. Britikov, I. Zlatkin, G. Fedyukovich, L. Alt, N. Sharygina, SolTG: A
CHC-Based Solidity Test Case Generator, in Computer Aided Verification -
36th International Conference, CAV 2024, Montreal, QC, Canada, July 24-27,
2024, Proceedings, Part I, ed. by A. Gurfinkel, V. Ganesh (Springer, 2024),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 466–479.
https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-65627-9 23. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65627-9 23
[3] S. Grebenshchikov, N.P. Lopes, C. Popeea, A. Rybalchenko, Synthesizing soft-
ware verifiers from proof rules, in ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’12, Beijing, China - June 11 - 16,
2012, ed. by J. Vitek, H. Lin, F. Tip (ACM, 2012), pp. 405–416. https://doi.org/
10.1145/2254064.2254112. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2254064.2254112
[4] A. Gurfinkel, T. Kahsai, A. Komuravelli, J.A. Navas, The SeaHorn Verifica-
tion Framework, in Computer Aided Verification - 27th International Conference,
CAV 2015, San Francisco, CA, USA, July 18-24, 2015, Proceedings, Part I,
ed. by D. Kroening, C.S. Pasareanu (Springer, 2015), Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pp. 343–361. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21690-4 20. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21690-4 20
[5] Y. Matsushita, T. Tsukada, N. Kobayashi, RustHorn: CHC-Based Verification
for Rust Programs, in Programming Languages and Systems - 29th European
Symposium on Programming, ESOP 2020, Held as Part of the European Joint
Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2020, Dublin, Ireland,
April 25-30, 2020, Proceedings, ed. by P. M¨uller (Springer, 2020), Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pp. 484–514. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-44914-8 18.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-44914-8 18
[6] H. Ogawa, T. Sekiyama, H. Unno, Thrust: A prophecy-based refinement type
system for rust. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 9(PLDI), 2056–2080 (2025). https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3729333. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3729333
[7] T. Kahsai, R. Kersten, P. R¨ummer, M. Sch¨af, Quantified Heap Invariants for
Object-Oriented Programs, in LPAR-21, 21st International Conference on Logic
for Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, Maun, Botswana, May 7-
12, 2017, ed. by T. Eiter, D. Sands (EasyChair, 2017), EPiC Series in Computing,
pp. 368–384. https://doi.org/10.29007/ZRCT. URL https://doi.org/10.29007/
zrct
[8] S. Wolff, E. Gupta, Z. Esen, H. Hojjat, P. R¨ummer, T. Wies, Arithmetizing Shape
Analysis, in Computer Aided Verification - 37th International Conference, CAV
2025, Zagreb, Croatia, July 23-25, 2025, Proceedings, Part I, ed. by R. Piskac,
29


Z. Rakamaric (Springer, 2025), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 56–
80. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-98668-0 3. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-98668-0 3
[9] R. Sato, N. Iwayama, N. Kobayashi, Combining higher-order model checking with
refinement type inference, in Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGPLAN Workshop
on Partial Evaluation and Program Manipulation, PEPM@POPL 2019, Cascais,
Portugal, January 14-15, 2019, ed. by M.V. Hermenegildo, A. Igarashi (ACM,
2019), pp. 47–53. https://doi.org/10.1145/3294032.3294081. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3294032.3294081
[10] H. Hojjat, P. R¨ummer, The ELDARICA Horn Solver, in 2018 Formal Meth-
ods in Computer Aided Design, FMCAD 2018, Austin, TX, USA, October 30
- November 2, 2018, ed. by N.S. Bjørner, A. Gurfinkel (IEEE, 2018), pp. 1–
7.
https://doi.org/10.23919/FMCAD.2018.8603013.
URL https://doi.org/10.
23919/FMCAD.2018.8603013
[11] M. Blicha, K. Britikov, N. Sharygina, The Golem Horn Solver, in Computer
Aided Verification - 35th International Conference, CAV 2023, Paris, France,
July 17-22, 2023, Proceedings, Part II, ed. by C. Enea, A. Lal (Springer, 2023),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 209–223.
https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-37703-7 10. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37703-7 10
[12] A. Komuravelli, A. Gurfinkel, S. Chaki, SMT-Based Model Checking for Recur-
sive Programs, in Computer Aided Verification - 26th International Conference,
CAV 2014, Held as Part of the Vienna Summer of Logic, VSL 2014, Vienna,
Austria, July 18-22, 2014. Proceedings, ed. by A. Biere, R. Bloem (Springer,
2014), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 17–34. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-08867-9 2. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08867-9 2
[13] F. Frohn, J. Giesl, Proving Non-Termination and Lower Runtime Bounds with
LoAT (System Description), in Automated Reasoning - 11th International Joint
Conference, IJCAR 2022, Haifa, Israel, August 8-10, 2022, Proceedings, ed. by
J. Blanchette, L. Kov´acs, D. Pattinson (Springer, 2022), Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pp. 712–722. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-10769-6 41. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-10769-6 41
[14] A.R. Bradley, SAT-Based Model Checking without Unrolling, in Verification,
Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation - 12th International Conference,
VMCAI 2011, Austin, TX, USA, January 23-25, 2011. Proceedings, ed. by
R. Jhala, D.A. Schmidt (Springer, 2011), Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pp. 70–87. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-18275-4 7. URL https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-642-18275-4 7
[15] E.M. Clarke, O. Grumberg, S. Jha, Y. Lu, H. Veith, Counterexample-Guided
Abstraction Refinement, in Computer Aided Verification, 12th International Con-
ference, CAV 2000, Chicago, IL, USA, July 15-19, 2000, Proceedings, ed. by E.A.
30


Emerson, A.P. Sistla (Springer, 2000), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp.
154–169. https://doi.org/10.1007/10722167 15. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
10722167 15
[16] F. Frohn, J. Giesl, ADCL: Acceleration Driven Clause Learning for Constrained
Horn Clauses, in Static Analysis - 30th International Symposium, SAS 2023,
Cascais, Portugal, October 22-24, 2023, Proceedings, ed. by M.V. Hermenegildo,
J.F. Morales (Springer, 2023), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 259–
285.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44245-2 13.
URL https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-031-44245-2 13
[17] A. Biere, A. Cimatti, E.M. Clarke, Y. Zhu, Symbolic Model Checking without
BDDs, in Tools and Algorithms for Construction and Analysis of Systems, 5th
International Conference, TACAS ’99, Held as Part of the European Joint Con-
ferences on the Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS’99, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, March 22-28, 1999, Proceedings, ed. by R. Cleaveland (Springer,
1999), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 193–207. https://doi.org/10.1007/
3-540-49059-0 14. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-49059-0 14
[18] M. Blicha, G. Fedyukovich, A.E.J. Hyv¨arinen, N. Sharygina, Transition Power
Abstractions for Deep Counterexample Detection, in Tools and Algorithms for the
Construction and Analysis of Systems - 28th International Conference, TACAS
2022, Held as Part of the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of
Software, ETAPS 2022, Munich, Germany, April 2-7, 2022, Proceedings, Part I,
ed. by D. Fisman, G. Rosu (Springer, 2022), Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pp. 524–542. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99524-9 29. URL https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-99524-9 29
[19] H. B¨urckert, A resolution principle for constrained logics. Artif. Intell. 66(2),
235–271 (1994). https://doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702(94)90027-2. URL https://
doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702(94)90027-2
[20] J.C. King, A New Approach to Program Testing, in Programming Methodology,
4th Informatik Symposium, IBM Germany, Wildbad, September 25-27, 1974,
ed. by C. Hackl (Springer, 1974), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 278–
290. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-07131-8 30. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
3-540-07131-8 30
[21] J.C. King, Symbolic execution and program testing. Commun. ACM 19(7), 385–
394 (1976).
https://doi.org/10.1145/360248.360252.
URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/360248.360252
[22] W. Craig, Linear reasoning. A new form of the Herbrand-Gentzen theorem. J.
Symb. Log. 22(3), 250–268 (1957). https://doi.org/10.2307/2963593
[23] P. R¨ummer, Craig interpolation in program verification. CoRR abs/2602.08532
(2026). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2602.08532. URL https://doi.org/10.
31


48550/arXiv.2602.08532. 2602.08532
[24] D. Dietsch, M. Heizmann, B. Musa, A. Nutz, A. Podelski, Craig vs. Newton
in software model checking, in Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on
Foundations of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2017, Paderborn, Germany,
September 4-8, 2017, ed. by E. Bodden, W. Sch¨afer, A. van Deursen, A. Zis-
man (ACM, 2017), pp. 487–497. https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106307. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106307
[25] S. Chandra, S.J. Fink, M. Sridharan, Snugglebug: a powerful approach to
weakest preconditions, in Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGPLAN Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2009, Dublin,
Ireland, June 15-21, 2009, ed. by M. Hind, A. Diwan (ACM, 2009), pp. 363–
374.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1542476.1542517.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
1542476.1542517
[26] S. Gulwani, S. Juvekar, Bound analysis using backward symbolic execution. Tech.
Rep. MSR-TR-2009-156, Microsoft Research (2009)
[27] K.R. Apt, M.H. van Emden, Contributions to the theory of logic programming.
J. ACM 29(3), 841–862 (1982). https://doi.org/10.1145/322326.322339. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/322326.322339
[28] R.A. Kowalski, D. Kuehner, Linear resolution with selection function.
Artif.
Intell. 2(3/4), 227–260 (1971).
https://doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702(71)90012-9.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702(71)90012-9
[29] R.A. Kowalski, Predicate Logic as Programming Language, in Information Pro-
cessing, Proceedings of the 6th IFIP Congress 1974, Stockholm, Sweden, August
5-10, 1974, ed. by J.L. Rosenfeld (North-Holland, 1974), pp. 569–574
[30] J. Jaffar, J. Lassez, Constraint Logic Programming, in Conference Record of the
Fourteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages,
Munich, Germany, January 21-23, 1987 (ACM Press, 1987), pp. 111–119. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/41625.41635. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/41625.41635
[31] M. Sheeran, S. Singh, G. St˚almarck, Checking Safety Properties Using Induction
and a SAT-Solver, in Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, Third Inter-
national Conference, FMCAD 2000, Austin, Texas, USA, November 1-3, 2000,
Proceedings, ed. by W.A.H. Jr., S.D. Johnson (Springer, 2000), Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pp. 108–125. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-40922-X 8. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-40922-X 8
[32] A.F. Donaldson, L. Haller, D. Kroening, P. R¨ummer, Software Verification Using
k-Induction, in Static Analysis - 18th International Symposium, SAS 2011,
Venice, Italy, September 14-16, 2011. Proceedings, ed. by E. Yahav (Springer,
2011), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 351–368. https://doi.org/10.1007/
32


978-3-642-23702-7 26. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-23702-7 26
[33] D. Beyer, M. Dangl, P. Wendler, Boosting k-Induction with Continuously-Refined
Invariants, in Computer Aided Verification - 27th International Conference,
CAV 2015, San Francisco, CA, USA, July 18-24, 2015, Proceedings, Part I,
ed. by D. Kroening, C.S. Pasareanu (Springer, 2015), Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pp. 622–640. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21690-4 42. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21690-4 42
[34] M. Chalupa, J. Strejcek, Backward Symbolic Execution with Loop Folding, in
Static Analysis - 28th International Symposium, SAS 2021, Chicago, IL, USA,
October 17-19, 2021, Proceedings, ed. by C. Dragoi, S. Mukherjee, K.S. Namjoshi
(Springer, 2021), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 49–76. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-88806-0 3. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-88806-0
3
[35] P.W. O’Hearn, Incorrectness logic. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4(POPL), 10:1–
10:32 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/3371078. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3371078
[36] J.A. Robinson, A machine-oriented logic based on the resolution principle. J.
ACM 12(1), 23–41 (1965). https://doi.org/10.1145/321250.321253. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1145/321250.321253
[37] N.S. Bjørner, A. Gurfinkel, K.L. McMillan, A. Rybalchenko, Horn Clause Solvers
for Program Verification, in Fields of Logic and Computation II - Essays Ded-
icated to Yuri Gurevich on the Occasion of His 75th Birthday, ed. by L.D.
Beklemishev, A. Blass, N. Dershowitz, B. Finkbeiner, W. Schulte (Springer,
2015), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 24–51. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-23534-9 2. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-23534-9 2
[38] M. Davis, H. Putnam, A computing procedure for quantification theory. J. ACM
7(3), 201–215 (1960). https://doi.org/10.1145/321033.321034. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/321033.321034
[39] P. Godefroid, M.Y. Levin, D.A. Molnar, Automated Whitebox Fuzz Testing,
in Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium,
NDSS 2008, San Diego, California, USA, 10th February - 13th February 2008
(The Internet Society, 2008). URL https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss2008/
automated-whitebox-fuzz-testing/
[40] P. Godefroid, N. Klarlund, K. Sen, DART: directed automated random testing,
in Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 2005 Conference on Programming Lan-
guage Design and Implementation, Chicago, IL, USA, June 12-15, 2005, ed.
by V. Sarkar, M.W. Hall (ACM, 2005), pp. 213–223. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1065010.1065036. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1065010.1065036
33


[41] C. Cadar, D. Dunbar, D.R. Engler, KLEE: Unassisted and Automatic Generation
of High-Coverage Tests for Complex Systems Programs, in 8th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2008, December
8-10, 2008, San Diego, California, USA, Proceedings, ed. by R. Draves, R. van
Renesse (USENIX Association, 2008), pp. 209–224.
URL http://www.usenix.
org/events/osdi08/tech/full papers/cadar/cadar.pdf
[42] J. Harrison, Handbook of Practical Logic and Automated Reasoning (Cambridge
University Press, 2009)
[43] C.A.R. Hoare, An axiomatic basis for computer programming. Communications
of the ACM 12(10), 576–580, 583 (1969). https://doi.org/10.1145/363235.363259.
URL https://doi.org
[44] E. De Angelis, H.G.V. K., CHC-COMP 2023: Competition Report, in Proceed-
ings 18th International Workshop on Logical and Semantic Frameworks, with
Applications and 10th Workshop on Horn Clauses for Verification and Synthe-
sis, LSFA/HCVS 2023, and 10th Workshop on Horn Clauses for Verification and
Synthesis, Rome, Italy & Paris, France, July 1-2, 2023 & April 23, 2023, ed. by
T. Kutsia, D. Ventura, D. Monniaux, J.F. Morales (2023), EPTCS, pp. 83–104.
https://doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.402.10. URL https://doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.
402.10
[45] P.A. Abdulla, C. Liang, P. R¨ummer, Boosting Constrained Horn Solving by
Unsat Core Learning, in Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpreta-
tion - 25th International Conference, VMCAI 2024, London, United Kingdom,
January 15-16, 2024, Proceedings, Part I, ed. by R. Dimitrova, O. Lahav,
S. Wolff (Springer, 2024), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 280–302.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-50524-9 13.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-50524-9 13
[46] M.E. Stickel, Automated deduction by theory resolution. J. Autom. Reason. 1(4),
333–355 (1985). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00244275. URL https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF00244275
[47] E. De Angelis, F. Fioravanti, J.P. Gallagher, M.V. Hermenegildo, A. Pet-
torossi, M. Proietti, Analysis and transformation of constrained horn clauses
for program verification.
Theory Pract. Log. Program. 22(6), 974–1042
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068421000211. URL https://doi.org/10.
1017/S1471068421000211
34
