Title: Certificate-Aware Property-Directed Reachability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.16472v1

Published Time: Tue, 19 May 2026 00:07:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Certificate-Aware Property-Directed Reachability 

Arman Ferdowsi 1 and Laura Kov´ acs 21Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna 2Faculty of Informatics, TU Wien Email: arman.ferdowsi@univie.ac.at, laura.kovacs@tuwien.ac.at 

Abstract —Property-Directed Reachability (PDR/IC3) is a stan-dard workhorse for hardware safety verification, but most imple-mentations are tuned primarily for time-to-answer and treat the produced invariant or counterexample as a secondary byproduct. In certified workflows, including recent hardware model checking competition rules, the certificate becomes a deliverable whose 

size , independent checking time , and reproducibility directly affect end-to-end cost. We present CAPDR, a certificate-aware variant of PDR that targets a joint objective over runtime, certificate size, and checker time, while keeping learning outside the trusted computing base. CAPDR exposes a small set of PDR choice points (blocker generalization, obligation ordering, clause pushing, and optional extensions) to a learned ranking policy, but preserves trust by design: every state-changing action is guarded by the same SAT checks as standard PDR, and a SAFE/UNSAFE claim is reported only after an independent checker validates the emitted invariant or trace. We formalize certificate-centric metrics and a replay log that records nondeterministic choices for artifact-grade reproducibility. On the 2024 Hardware Model Checking Competition bit-level safety benchmarks, CAPDR solves six more instances than the baseline. Over each configuration’s checker-accepted solved set, the median certificate-size proxy decreases by 24.6% and the median checker time by 49%. Post-fixpoint invariant minimization yields further reductions. 

Index Terms —Hardware model checking, property-directed reachability, proof-carrying verification, certificate checking, learning-guided heuristics 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Property-Directed Reachability (PDR), also known as IC3, is one of the most effective SAT-based techniques for proving safety properties of finite-state hardware transition systems [1]. A key attraction of PDR is that it naturally produces inde-pendently checkable evidence : in the SAFE case, an inductive invariant; in the UNSAFE case, a finite counterexample trace. Historically, however, this evidence was largely treated as a secondary artifact, while implementations and benchmarks focused on wall-clock time and solved instances. This emphasis is shifting. The hardware model checking competition (HWMCC) introduced mandatory certification for its bit-level safety track in 2024 [2] and continued this certificate-centered workflow in the 2025 edition [3]. More broadly, witness- or certificate-based validation is now a standard mechanism to increase trust, reproducibility, and inter-operability of verification results, e.g., in software verification competitions where results are accompanied by independently validated witnesses [4]. This reflects a recurring principle in automated reasoning: the search procedure may be highly heuristic, provided that correctness is discharged by an indepen-dently checkable certificate. In industrial assurance pipelines, verification outputs are archived, rechecked, and compared across toolchain updates. In these settings, the certificate is part of the deliverable, not merely an internal byproduct. Once certificates become first-class artifacts, quality matters. Two correct SAFE certificates for the same system may differ by orders of magnitude in size and checking cost. Oversized invariants slow down or even prevent independent checking. They also complicate reuse in incremental verification and downstream reasoning. Moreover, modern PDR implementa-tions are heuristic-driven and may be nondeterministic, due for example to randomized SAT heuristics, clause database effects, and parallelism. As such, PDR may lead to certificates that vary substantially across runs. This instability complicates debugging, hinders regression bisection, and reduces confidence in certified workflows. At the same time, the community has begun exploring machine learning to guide verification, including learning-guided PDR/IC3 variants [5] and learning-based algorithm selection for hardware model checking [6]. These directions raise a practical requirement: learning should improve end-to-end cost without enlarging the trusted computing base. In this work, we advocate certificate-aware PDR , in short CAPDR, without changing what must be trusted. CAPDR is not a new certificate format and not a new checker: it changes the online search objective inside PDR so that the artifact ultimately accepted by an independent checker is smaller, faster to validate, and more reproducible. Learning enters only as a ranking oracle at a few well-defined choice points, namely blocker generalization, obligation scheduling, clause pushing, and optional guarded extensions. Every state-changing action remains protected by the standard SAT guards, and a SAFE/UNSAFE claim is returned only with a checker-accepted certificate. The policy is trained offline on prior instances and then deployed frozen on new ones; there is no per-instance retraining or online adaptation inside a run. 

Our contributions are summarized below.  

> •

Certificate-aware objective. We define a run-level cost model over runtime, certificate size, and independent checker time, turning PDR into a controllable optimization process (Section IV-A–Section IV-E).  

> •

A soundness-transparent learning interface. We expose a small set of PDR choice points to a ranking policy while preserving correctness by the same SAT guards as standard PDR and an independent checker. This makes soundness checker-relative and independent of the learned policy (Section IV-C–Section IV-D).  

> •

Replay logs for reproducibility. We propose a compact replay log that records nondeterministic choices together 

> arXiv:2605.16472v1 [cs.LO] 15 May 2026 2

with the solver-derived artifacts needed to determinize re-execution (Section IV-F–Section IV-G).  

> •

Soundness of CAPDR is established, in a policy indepen-dent manner (Section V).  

> •

Experimental evaluation under a disjoint develop-ment/evaluation protocol. On certified hardware bench-marks, frozen-policy evaluation on held-out instances reduces certificate size and checker time while improving solved coverage; post-fixpoint invariant minimization yields further gains (Section VI). 

Paper organization: Section II reviews related work. Section III recalls PDR and certificate checking. Section IV presents CAPDR. Section V proves checker-relative soundness, and Section VI evaluates the approach. Due to space constraints, detailed proofs of our results are deferred to Appendix B. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Certification in hardware model checking 

Certification in hardware model checking predates HWMCC’24, including witness-circuit certification and strati-fied certification for k-induction [7], [8]. HWMCC’24 made certificates mandatory for the bit-level safety track [2], and HWMCC’25 continued this workflow while requiring certifi-cates for satisfiable bit-level liveness results [3]. Certification is not limited to the core model checking algorithm: certifying preprocessing has been developed for phase abstraction [9], and compositional certification frameworks show how to combine certificates across decomposed problems [10]. CAPDR is or-thogonal to these efforts: rather than proposing a new certificate format, we make the heuristic search inside PDR certificate-aware and explicitly optimize for downstream checking cost. A closely related direction studies how to extract, certify, or minimize invariants once they have been found, e.g., via minimal safe inductive subsets and proof-certificate extraction for model checkers [11]–[13]. CAPDR differs in focus: rather than treating certificate quality as a post hoc minimization problem or certification as a separate backend step, we guide the PDR search itself online toward certificates that are smaller, faster to check, and more reproducible. 

B. Strengthening and optimizing PDR 

Since the first version of IC3 [1], performance improvements have been made both at the algorithm layer and at the SAT-solver interface. For example, removing activation literals from single-clause assumptions can speed up PDR-style workloads [14]. Recent work has also investigated lemma-quality criteria and strategies that improve the ability to push and reuse learned information, e.g., via searching for i-good 

lemmas [15]. More recently, extended-resolution reasoning has been integrated into PDR to improve proof power [16], and dedicated SAT-solver optimizations tailored to IC3 workloads have been shown to yield substantial speedups [17]. Another relevant line augments IC3 with internal signals, allowing invariants over an enlarged variable vocabulary when no concise latch-only invariant exists [18]. This line is particularly relevant to our optional auxiliary-variable modes: unlike such approaches, CAPDR makes the checker-facing certificate interface explicit by requiring either an X-only certificate accepted by the base checker or an extended certificate accompanied by a conservative auxiliary-state relation. CAPDR can incorporate such techniques as optional guarded actions, enabling controlled trade-offs between solver runtime and certificate-centric metrics. 

C. Learning-guided verification 

DeepIC3 [5], lemma-prediction approaches for IC3 gener-alization [19], and the recent LeGend framework [20] use learning to improve PDR/IC3 search, while Btor2-Select [6] applies learning at the algorithm-selection level. Recent offline heuristic-evolution work such as IC3-Evolve [21] is also close in spirit: candidate changes are admitted only through independently validated certificates or witnesses. CAPDR differs in emphasis: we do not propose a new certificate format or checker; instead we make the online PDR/IC3 search objective certificate-aware, explicitly targeting certificate size, checker cost, and replayability while keeping correctness checker-relative. 

D. Proof formats and trustworthy checking 

Trustworthy reasoning has a long history in SAT and SMT. DRAT proofs and the DRAT-trim checker [22] provided an expressive and practical proof format for SAT, and LRAT adds hints that enable efficient checking in trusted systems [23]. Efficient LRAT checking integrated with modern SAT solvers is demonstrated in [24], and formally verified checking has also been developed [25]. Recent work extends clausal-proof certification to Lean, importantly via a verified Lean checker [26] for substitution-redundancy proofs; this yields a clausal proof system gen-eralizing PR and RAT. For SMT, Alethe [27] and tools like Carcara [28], as well as proof reconstruction into Is-abelle/HOL [29] and Lean [30], show how solver outputs can be independently validated. Extending DRAT-style proofs to SMT further highlights the broader relevance of proof logging [31]. CAPDR complements these efforts by focusing on certifying 

model checking outcomes (invariants/traces) and by making the search procedure certificate-aware while keeping the correctness argument entirely checker-based. III. B ACKGROUND 

We briefly recall the transition-system model, the SAFE/UNSAFE certificate view adopted in this paper, and the PDR/IC3 and certificate notions used later. 

A. Transition systems and safety 

We consider finite-state transition systems over Boolean state variables X (latches) and Boolean input variables U . A system is specified by a triple (Init (X), Trans (X, U, X ′), Prop (X)) ,where Init characterizes initial states, Trans is the transition relation, and Prop is a safety property that must hold in all reachable states. 3

Definition 1 (Reachable state) . A state x is reachable if there exists a finite sequence of inputs u0, . . . , u k−1 and states x0, . . . , x k such that Init (x0), Trans (xi, u i, x i+1 ) for all i < k , and xk = x. We denote the set of reachable states by Reach .

Definition 2 (Safety) . The system is safe if and only if 

Reach ⇒ Prop , i.e., all reachable states satisfy the property. B. Certificates 

A standard way to certify safety-verification outcomes is via explicit, independently checkable artifacts: an inductive invariant in the SAFE case and a counterexample trace in the UNSAFE case. 

Definition 3 (Safe certificate) . A safe certificate is a Boolean formula Inv (X) over the state variables satisfying: 

Init (X) ⇒ Inv (X) (1) 

Inv (X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ⇒ Inv (X′) (2) 

Inv (X) ⇒ Prop (X) (3) In base mode, checking Eq. (1)-Eq. (3) reduces to three SAT queries (unsatisfiability checks), and is typically much cheaper than re-running model checking from scratch. Competition-grade certification frameworks often use more structured encodings of invariants (e.g., witness circuits) and establish the certificate’s checkability and semantics in a dedicated checker [2]. 

Definition 4 (Unsafe certificate) . An unsafe certificate is a finite trace x0, . . . , x k with inputs u0, . . . , u k−1 such that Init (x0),each step satisfies Trans (xi, u i, x i+1 ), and ¬Prop (xk). This can be checked by simulation or by SAT. C. Property-Directed Reachability (PDR/IC3) 

PDR incrementally constructs a sequence of clause sets (“frames”) F0, F 1, . . . such that: (i) F0 is initialized from Init ,(ii) each Fi over-approximates the states reachable within i

steps, and (iii) the sequence is monotone ( Fi ⇒ Fi+1 ). The PDR algorithm searches for counterexamples to induction 

(CTIs) at successive frames and blocks them by learning clauses that exclude the offending state while remaining inductive relative to the previous frame. Clauses that satisfy the corresponding push condition can be propagated forward, strengthening later frames. When two consecutive closed frames coincide, their common clause set is an inductive invariant and therefore a SAFE certificate. If blocking reaches the initial frame, the predecessor chain yields a concrete counterexample trace; see [1], [32]. Modern PDR implementations differ primarily in how they perform generalization, how they order proof obligations, and how they manage incremental SAT queries; a classic implementation-oriented treatment is [33]. IV. C ERTIFICATE -A WARE PDR In this section, we introduce CAPDR as a certificate-aware 

variant of PDR/IC3 that optimizes time-to-answer jointly with certificate size and checker cost without enlarging the trusted computing base beyond an independent checker (see Fig. 1). CAPDR addresses the following constrained optimization problem. Given a transition system (Init , Trans , Prop ), an independent checker, and a resource budget, guide only those choices that are already admissible in a standard PDR/IC3 run so as to obtain a checker-accepted SAFE or UNSAFE certificate with low end-to-end cost. The cost is measured by solving time, certificate size, checker time, and replayability. The verifier may change search order and lemma selection, but it may not change certificate semantics, bypass PDR guard checks, or report a result without checker acceptance. Operationally, CAPDR exposes four finite, guard-checked choice points to a frozen ranker: blocker generalization, obliga-tion ordering, clause pushing, and optional guarded extensions (see Section IV-D for more details). During development , prior runs are logged and used to fit the ranker. During deployment ,the ranker is fixed and used only to order verifier-generated candidates. 

A. Separation and trust boundary 

In CAPDR, learning may affect search but never the correct-ness argument. The trusted computing base consists only of a standalone certificate checker: its parsing layer, the SAT engine used for SAFE certificates, the trace-evaluation/simulation rou-tine used for UNSAFE certificates, and any validation routine for extension-mode definitional extensions. Everything else, including the possibly nondeterministic certificate-producing verifier, the learned policy, feature extraction, training, and hyperparameter tuning, is untrusted .Accordingly, all correctness claims are conditioned solely on checker acceptance. The policy may rank only alternatives already admitted by the underlying algorithm, and any state-changing action (e.g., learning a clause or pushing a clause ) is committed only after the corresponding PDR-style satisfiability guard succeeds, or its conservative auxiliary-variable variant when auxiliaries are present. Thus, learning can change the search order and which valid lemmas are found, but it cannot by itself make an invalid certificate cross the trust boundary. 

B. Formal certificate semantics 

In base mode, a safe certificate is emitted as a CNF invariant 

Inv (X) ≡ V 

> C∈Inv

C(X), where each C is a clause (a disjunction of literals over X). Its semantics is exactly that of Eqs. (1) to (3). An unsafe certificate is emitted as a finite trace π = ( x0, u 0, x 1, . . . , u k−1, x k) with xi ∈ { 0, 1}|X| and 

ui ∈ { 0, 1}|U |. Its semantics is exactly that of Definition 4. Optional strengthening may introduce auxiliary state bits 

Y . To preserve soundness for the original system over X,CAPDR supports either projection mode , which emits an X-only candidate invariant later validated by the base SAFE checker, or extension mode , which emits (Def , Inv (X, Y )) .Writing Def ′(X′, Y ′) for the primed copy of Def (X, Y ), the extended system is 

Init ext (X, Y ) ≜Init (X) ∧ Def (X, Y ),

Trans ext (X, U, Y, X ′, Y ′) ≜Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ Def (X, Y )

∧ Def ′(X′, Y ′).4Hardware model                         

> (Init ,Trans ,Prop )
> AIGER / bit-level safety
> CAPDRverifier (untrusted search)
> PDR/IC3 core
> frames F0, F 1, . . .
> CTIs →obligations →lemmas
> SAT guards enforce validity
> (blocker inductiveness, push checks, . . . )
> Choice points
> D1: blocker generalization D2: obligation scheduling D3: clause pushing order D4: optional extensions
> (all guard-checked)
> Learned ranking policy (untrusted) scores candidates, never commits
> rank
> model & property
> Optimize end-to-end cost: J=α t +βsize( π) + γ t chk
> Certificate π
> SAFE: invariant Inv
> UNSAFE: trace
> Replay log
> (records nondeterministic choices)
> emit
> trust boundary
> Independent checker
> (parsing + SAT)
> validate Inv or trace then accept/reject
> check
> Deliverable
> SAFE or UNSAFE
> Smaller certificates
> Faster checking
> Reproducible runs
> validated
> untrusted search (learning may be wrong; cannot break soundness) trusted checking (TCB)

Fig. 1: CAPDR overview and trust boundary. Learning guides heuristic choice points inside PDR/IC3, but every state-changing action is SAT-guarded. The verifier emits a certificate and replay log, and a small independent checker (the TCB) validates the artifact before reporting SAFE/UNSAFE. 

We require Def to be conservative under projection to X:

∀x. Init (x) ⇒ ∃ y. Def (x, y ), (4) 

∀x, u, x ′, y.  Trans (x, u, x ′) ∧ Def (x, y ) ⇒ ∃ y′. Def (x′, y ′).

(5) In extension mode, the checker validates both Def and Inv 

on the extended system. Acceptance then implies safety of the original system (Proposition 2). Since the experiments in Section VI use base mode, here we restrict our attention to the X-only case. More details about auxiliary extensions are deferred to Appendix C. 

C. PDR core invariants and guard checks 

To specify the learning interface precisely, we restate the frame invariants and SAT guard checks that determine when a proposed state-changing action may be committed in PDR. Recall that a frame Fi is a CNF over X. At any time, the engine maintains a finite prefix of frames F0, . . . , F k+1 for a current depth k ≥ 0. New frames are created lazily and initialized to 

Prop . For the algorithmic presentation, we assume that Prop 

has been fixed once in CNF (or via a fixed clausal encoding shared by the verifier and the checker); by abuse of notation, we write Prop for that clausal form. Since safety properties may be violated already in the initial states, CAPDR first checks whether Init (X) ∧ ¬ Prop (X) is satisfiable. If it is, the system is immediately UNSAFE with a length-0 trace, and the run terminates with an UNSAFE certificate accepted by the independent checker. Hence, for the remainder we may assume Init ⇒ Prop .We maintain the standard PDR frame invariants for all currently allocated indices: 

F0 ≡ Init (6) 

Fi ⇒ Fi+1 ∀ 0 ≤ i ≤ k (7) 

Fi ⇒ Prop ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ k+1 (8) 

Fi(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ⇒ Fi+1 (X′) ∀ 0 ≤ i < k. (9) Eq. (9) holds for all closed levels i < k (consecution). At the frontier level k, ruling out frontier CTIs establishes Fk(X) ∧

Trans (X, U, X ′) ⇒ Prop (X′), and any strengthening of Fk+1 

is justified either by a blocker check relative to Fk or by a successful push check. Hence, when after the push phase 

Fk ≡ Fk+1 , the common frame is inductive and thus a SAFE certificate. 

Definition 5 (SAT encodings) . All implications are checked via unsatisfiability: A ⇒ B iff A ∧ ¬ B is UNSAT . We define and write UNSAT (Φ) and SAT (Φ) for (un)satisfiability queries to the underlying SAT backend on a fixed equisatisfiable clausal encoding of Φ; when Φ is already in CNF, this is just Φ itself. 

Definition 6 (State-cube convention) . A state cube is a complete 

cube over X, i.e., a conjunction containing exactly one literal for each variable in X. Such a cube represents exactly one concrete state. For a state cube d, its primed copy d(X′) is the same conjunction over X′, constraining the next-state variables to that state, and ¬d is the clause excluding that state. In the obligation mechanism below, d and dpred always denote state cubes extracted from SAT models. 

To find bad successors, a typical CTI query at depth i checks 

SAT 



Fi(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ ¬ Prop (X′)



. (10) If Eq. (10) is satisfiable, a model yields a current-state valuation on X and a bad successor valuation on X′. We extract the corresponding bad-successor state cube d over X by unpriming the X′-literals and create the obligation (i+1 , d ).More concretely, a proof obligation is a pair (i, d ) where 

i ≥ 0 and d is a state cube over X, i.e., a complete cube representing one concrete target state. Equivalently, d(X′) fixes the next-state variables to that target state. Operationally, each non-root obligation also stores the successor state cube and the input valuation by which it was generated; following these successor links from an initial cube yields a concrete suffix ending in a bad state. If i = 0 , blocking has reached the initial frame and the stored obligation chain is emitted as a candidate UNSAFE trace. More generally, before learning any blocker for an obligation (i, d ),the engine checks whether SAT  Init (X)∧d(X). If this query is SAT, then, because d is a complete cube, the target state represented by d is an initial state. The stored successor links therefore yield a candidate UNSAFE trace, and no blocker is learned for d. Only when i > 0 and UNSAT (Init (X) ∧ d(X)) 

does PDR attempt to block (i, d ) by the predecessor query: 

SAT 



Fi−1(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ d(X′)



. (11) If Eq. (11) is SAT, the model yields a concrete predecessor valuation on X together with a witness input valuation on U ;let dpred be the corresponding predecessor state cube over X.We store the successor link dpred 

> u

−→ d, requeue (i, d ), and add 5

(i−1, d pred ). If Eq. (11) is UNSAT, then no state satisfying Fi−1

can reach the target cube d in one step. The fallback ( base )PDR blocker is C0 ≜ ¬d, the clause excluding exactly the concrete state represented by d. More generally, CAPDR may try a generalized blocker, but any clause C(X) actually inserted for obligation (i, d ) must satisfy the same guard conditions: 

d(X) ⇒ ¬ C(X) (blocks the target cube) (12) 

Init (X) ⇒ C(X) (initiation) (13) 

Fi−1(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ⇒ C(X′) (relative inductiveness) .

(14) Condition (13) is equivalent to UNSAT (Init (X) ∧ ¬ C(X)) ,and condition (14) is equivalent to UNSAT  Fi−1(X) ∧

Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ ¬ C(X′).

Clause insertion: When Eqs. (12) to (14) hold, the verifier may conjoin C to F1, . . . , F i, never to F0. This preserves monotonicity, closed-level consecution, and Fj ⇒ Prop by the standard guarded insertion argument given in Appendix B-A .Thus the policy only chooses which candidate C to try; insertion itself remains SAT-guarded. 

D. Soundness-transparent learning-guided choice points 

Given the guard conditions above, several stages of PDR generate finite candidate sets. Crucially, the order in which candidates are tried can substantially affect both runtime and the emitted certificate. Our proposed CAPDR exposes these stages as choice points (CP) at which a policy ranks candidates: 

CP1 : Learning-guided blocker generalization: After an obliga-tion (i, d ) has passed the initial-state check and its predecessor query is UNSAT, CAPDR may replace the base blocker C0 by a generalized blocker C = ¬d⋆, where d⋆ ⊆ d is a subcube of the target-state cube. Since d ⇒ d⋆, every such C satisfies 

d ⇒ ¬ C. Relative to C0, smaller d⋆ yields a shorter, logically stronger clause that excludes more states and may reduce the eventual invariant size and checker cost. The blocker generator used at CP1 is deliberately conven-tional and nontrusted: its role is only to enumerate a finite menu of possible generalizations, not to prove them correct. Concretely, the verifier constructs C(d, i ) ⊆ {¬ d⋆ | d⋆ ⊆

d}, C0 = ¬d ∈ C (d, i ), where d⋆ ⊆ d means that d⋆ is obtained by dropping zero or more literals from the target-state cube d. In our implementation, the predecessor query is issued as Fi−1(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) under the target assumptions corresponding to the literals of d(X′). When the SAT solver returns an UNSAT core over these target assumptions, the core induces a subcube dcore ⊆ d and hence the candidate 

¬dcore . If no such core is available, we use dcore = d. A deterministic, budgeted literal-deletion search then proposes additional subcubes around this core. Any SAT answers used during this search are recorded as solver-derived artifacts for replay, but they are not trusted as certificate steps. Consequently, Eq. (12) is automatic for all candidates in 

C(d, i ). Only initiation and relative inductiveness remain to be checked. The verifier scans the policy-ordered list and commits the first C satisfying UNSAT (Init (X) ∧ ¬ C(X)) 

and UNSAT (Fi−1(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ ¬ C(X′)) . If every proper generalization fails these guards, the fallback C0 =

¬d remains present and is admissible by Proposition 1. Its certificate-aware role is to decide which verifier-generated blocker candidates should be tried first, trading shorter and stronger clauses against the SAT effort needed to validate them. 

Proposition 1 (Base blocker is admissible after the initial-state check) . If i > 0, UNSAT (Init (X) ∧ d(X)) , and the predeces-sor query Eq. (11) for an obligation (i, d ) is UNSAT, then the base clause C0 ≜ ¬d satisfies Eqs. (12) to (14) .

CP2 : Obligation ordering: This choice point ranks pending state obligations rather than candidate clauses. The order in which obligations (i, d ) are processed does not affect soundness but affects runtime and the set of learned clauses. The policy can rank obligations using features such as frame index i,recency, requeue count, predecessor-chain depth, solver conflict statistics, or clause activity measures. To preserve progress, the engine may enforce fairness (e.g., bounded starvation). 

CP3 : Pushing schedule and clause selection: For each learned clause C ∈ Fi with i ≥ 1, pushing attempts to establish: 

Fi(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ⇒ C(X′), (15) equivalently UNSAT (Fi ∧ Trans ∧ ¬ C′). If Eq. (15) holds, 

C can be added to Fi+1 . Unlike CP1, the candidate set here consists only of clauses already present in some frame; CP3 does not synthesize a new blocker, but only decides which existing clause to try to propagate and when. This schedule influences both convergence and the final invariant structure, but every successful push is guarded by Eq. (15). 

CP4 : Optional reasoning extensions (guarded): If the im-plementation includes optional strengthening methods (e.g., extended-resolution-based reasoning [16]), CAPDR treats en-abling/disabling them as a policy decision. Such methods must be integrated so that any clause ultimately inserted into frames still satisfies the same guard conditions Eqs. (12) to (14) (in the appropriate variable space), and any auxiliary-variable use must be reflected in certificate semantics (see Section IV-B). 

E. Run-level cost metrics and objective 

Given the guard-checked choices above, we evaluate a run by the vector (t, size( π), t chk ), where t is solving time, π is the emitted certificate, and tchk is the time taken by an independent checker on the emitted certificate. Since checking cost depends on the checker and SAT engine, we treat tchk as the ground-truth downstream cost. For learning, one may additionally log proxies such as the number of SAT calls and their sizes. Below, we define the certificate-size component size( π), and then use a scalarization only when a single optimization target is needed for learning or end-to-end reporting. 

Definition 7 (Certificate-size proxy) . For a CNF invari-ant Inv , let lit( Inv ) ≜ P 

> C∈Inv

|C|. For a trace π =(x0, u 0, x 1, . . . , u k−1, x k), let bits( π) ≜ (k+1) · | X| + k · | U |.We define 

size( π) ≜

(

lit( Inv ), if π = Inv (SAFE) ,

bits( π), if π is a trace (UNSAFE) .6

Definition 8 (Scalarized objective) . When a single scalar is needed, we combine the run-level vector (t, size( π), t chk ) as 

J = α · t + β · size( π) + γ · tchk , (16) 

with user-chosen weights α, β, γ ≥ 0. Thus J is simply a tunable scalarization of solving time, certificate bulk, and downstream checking effort. 

The proxy size( π) intentionally mixes two outcome-specific measures: literal count for SAFE certificates and trace bit count for UNSAFE certificates. Accordingly, aggregate SAFE+UNSAFE summaries using size( π) (or a scalarization that includes it) should be read only as coarse workflow-level bookkeeping across outcome types. Our main certificate-quality analysis is therefore outcome-homogeneous, focusing on SAFE invariants in Table II and Figs. 2a to 2c. We still report the underlying vector metrics (t, size( π), t chk );the local scorer introduced in Section IV-F is used only as a surrogate for the action values induced by this global objective. 

F. Policy-guided execution and reproducibility a) Offline learning and deployment-time scoring: The policy is used in two phases. During development, runs on a development corpus disjoint from the deployment instances produce logged ranking events, feature vectors, guard outcomes, and certificate-aware costs. These logs are used only to fit θ. During deployment, θ is frozen: there is no per-instance retraining or online update, and the policy’s only operational role is to order finite candidate sets already generated by the verifier. At a choice point CP r ∈ {CP1 , CP2 , CP3 , CP4 }, the current proof-state context ϕ determines a ranking event 

e = ( r, ϕ, A ), where A is finite: blocker candidates for CP1, ready obligations for CP2, learned clauses eligible for pushing for CP3, and guarded extensions for CP4. For each a ∈ A, the verifier computes deterministic features ψ(ϕ, a ), and the frozen scorer assigns score θ (ϕ, a ) ≜ gθ (ψ(ϕ, a )) . Fixed tie-breaking yields a deterministic total order, with higher-scored candidates tried first. The global objective J in Eq. (16) supplies only development-time preferences: labels or comparisons are derived from observed or rollout-estimated downstream cost; the ideal local value is formalized in Appendix D. CAPDR does not compute this value online. In deployment, CP1 and CP3 scan candidates in score order but commit a state-changing action only after its guard succeeds. CP2 selects the highest-ranked ready obligation subject to fairness. CP4 may be enabled only after its conservative validation conditions hold. The policy cannot bypass validation, remove the mandatory fallback blocker, skip SAT guards, change checker semantics, or bypass the final checker: a SAFE/UNSAFE report is produced only after checker acceptance. 

b) Replay log: To support artifact-grade reproducibility, the engine records (i) tool and SAT-solver identifiers, versions, configurations, and seeds, (ii) every solver-derived artifact that can influence later control flow or candidate generation, such as extracted CTI cubes, predecessor cubes, and UNSAT-core-derived candidate sets, together with canonical hashes for integrity, and (iii) the full sequence of attempted actions, their guard outcomes, and hashes of the relevant contexts before each attempt. A replay run reuses the recorded artifacts directly, or in a stricter mode checks them against a determinized recomputation. Any hash mismatch or guard-outcome mismatch flags divergence due to nondeterminism or implementation drift. 

c) Stability and replay-fidelity metrics: For SAFE certificates, let canon (Inv ) denote the clause set obtained by sorting literals within each clause and deleting duplicates. We measure cross-seed instability by the Jaccard distance between the canonicalized clause sets produced under two seeds, and replay fidelity by the same distance between an original run and its deterministic replay from the recorded log. Thus lower is better, and exact replay gives ∆replay  

> Inv

(s) = 0 . We use ∆seed 

> Inv

for stability evaluation and ∆replay  

> Inv

for replay validation; exact formulas are deferred to Appendix E. 

G. Operational summary 

In base mode, CAPDR follows the standard PDR/IC3 loop and changes only the order in which admissible choices are tried. It first handles the length-0 counterexample case, then maintains frames F0, . . . , F k+1 and proof obligations (i, d ).Frontier CTIs are blocked by predecessor search and guard-validated blocker insertion; once the frontier is closed, learned clauses are pushed using Eq. (15). If two consecutive closed frames satisfy Fk ≡ Fk+1 , the common frame is emitted as a candidate invariant and may be minimized only by rechecking the three SAFE-certificate SAT conditions. A SAFE or UNSAFE result is reported only after the independent checker accepts the emitted invariant or trace; rejection is treated as FAIL . Full pseudocode is given in Appendix A. The 

> INV

-MIN variant used in Section VI performs this post-fixpoint step greedily: it first removes duplicate or subsumed clauses, then tries clause deletions and literal deletions, keeping an edit only if the three SAFE-checker queries Eqs. (17) to (19) remain UNSAT. V. S OUNDNESS ARGUMENT 

What follows makes the trust boundary from Section IV-A precise. We first fix the checker model and the assumptions on the trusted components. We then prove that checker acceptance implies semantic correctness of SAFE and UNSAFE certificates, and finally lift these certificate-level guarantees to CAPDR itself. Consequently, the learned policy may affect search, but it does not participate in the correctness argument. 

A. Checker model and assumptions 

This subsection fixes the checker-level objects used in the rest of Section V. The following assumptions A1-A2 are the only metatheoretic assumptions about the trusted checker from Section IV-A : they state that its low-level reasoning and evaluation are correct. 

Assumption A1 (Checker-query correctness): Answers returned by the SAT engine used inside the checker are correct: if UNSAT, the queried formula is unsatisfiable; if SAT, any returned assignment satisfies the queried formula. 7

Assumption A2 (Parsing and evaluation correctness): The checker faithfully parses (Init , Trans , Prop ) and the certificate, treats primed and unprimed variables consistently, correctly evaluates trace steps for UNSAFE certificates, and correctly implements any validation routine used for extension-mode definitional extensions. Under assumptions A1-A2, we define the acceptance condi-tions of the checkers used throughout the proofs. 

SAFE checker (base mode): Given a transition system 

(Init (X), Trans (X, U, X ′), Prop (X)) and a candidate invari-ant Inv (X), the SAFE checker accepts if and only if all of the following are UNSAT: 

Init (X) ∧ ¬ Inv (X) (17) 

Inv (X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ ¬ Inv (X′) (18) 

Inv (X) ∧ ¬ Prop (X). (19) These are exactly the negations of Eq. (1)-Eq. (3). 

UNSAFE checker: Given (Init , Trans , Prop ) and a trace π =(x0, u 0, x 1, . . . , u k−1, x k), the UNSAFE checker accepts if and only if:  

> •

Init (x0) evaluates to true,  

> •

for all i < k , Trans (xi, u i, x i+1 ) evaluates to true, and  

> •

¬Prop (xk) evaluates to true. Equivalently, it checks that π is a valid finite execution ending in a bad state. 

SAFE checker (extension mode): When auxiliaries Y

are present, the emitted SAFE certificate is a pair 

(Def , Inv (X, Y )) . The extension-mode checker accepts if and only if (i) it validates Def by a procedure whose correctness guarantees Eqs. (4) and (5), and (ii) it accepts Inv on the extended system (Init ext , Trans ext , Prop ) using the SAFE checks Eq. (17)-Eq. (19) over state variables (X, Y ).The next certificate-soundness results are semantic conse-quences of these acceptance conditions. Assumptions A1-A2 are needed only when relating those mathematical conditions to the behavior of an actual checker implementation in Theorem 3. 

B. SAFE and UNSAFE certificates 

Theorem 1 (SAFE certificate soundness in base mode) . If the SAFE checker in base mode accepts an invariant Inv , then the transition system satisfies the safety property Prop .

Proposition 2 (Soundness under conservative exten-sion) . Assume Def satisfies Eq. (4) -Eq. (5) , and let 

(Init ext , Trans ext , Prop ) be the extended system from Sec-tion IV-B . If the SAFE checker accepts an invariant Inv (X, Y )

for the extended system, then the original transition system 

(Init (X), Trans (X, U, X ′), Prop (X)) is safe. 

Theorem 2 (UNSAFE certificate soundness) . If the UNSAFE checker accepts a trace π, the transition system violates Prop .C. Soundness of CAPDR as a certificate-producing procedure 

The previous theorems establish correctness of certificates 

independent of how they were found. We now connect this to CAPDR. A CAPDR run outputs either SAFE (with a candidate invariant Inv ), or UNSAFE (with a candidate trace π). In both cases, CAPDR reports the claim as final output only after the corresponding checker accepts the emitted artifact; otherwise the run is treated as FAIL , not as a SAFE/UNSAFE result. This reporting discipline is stated in Section IV-G and made explicit in the full pseudocode of Algorithm 1. 

Theorem 3 (CAPDR soundness) . Assuming assumptions A1-A2,  

> •

If CAPDR returns SAFE with a certificate accepted by the appropriate SAFE checker (base mode or extension mode), then the original transition system satisfies Prop . 

> •

If CAPDR returns UNSAFE with a certificate accepted by the UNSAFE checker, then the original transition system violates Prop .

Corollary 1. Under assumptions A1-A2, CAPDR is sound regardless of the learned policy. D. Remark: completeness and progress 

Soundness is independent of completeness. An adversar-ial policy can still delay progress by prioritizing unhelpful candidates. To recover the usual completeness argument of finite-state PDR, the implementation should ensure that the underlying baseline search remains guard-complete: (i) blocking candidate sets are nonempty, with ¬d always available when Eq. (11) is UNSAT, (ii) if the scorer is unavailable, the engine reverts to a deterministic baseline order, and (iii) the scheduler is fair in the sense that every pending obligation and every pending push opportunity is eventually served by that baseline order (bounded starvation suffices). VI. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 

CAPDR improves the checker-accepted artifact, not merely the verifier’s time-to-answer. We separate four questions: whether online guidance improves the certified workflow objective; whether the raw SAFE invariants become smaller and faster to check; whether replay removes residual nonde-terminism; and which guarded PDR choice points contribute most. The CAPDR (learned) configuration measures the online-search contribution. The CAPDR + INV -MIN configuration is reported separately as safe post-fixpoint minimization. 

A. Benchmarks, tool configurations, and protocol 1) Benchmarks: We evaluate on the bit-level safety bench-marks from the Hardware Model Checking Competition (HWMCC), which provides AIGER bit-level instances together with a workflow based on independently checkable certificates. We use two disjoint benchmark corpora. The development corpus Bdev is the deduplicated bit-vector single-property AIGER subset of the HWMCC’20 benchmark archive [34], with all HWMCC’24 benchmark names and canonical AIGER hashes removed (its SAFE subset contains 190 instances), and is used only for offline fitting, model selection, and ablation. This is a natural development source for HWMCC: it is competition-selected and bit-blasted to AIGER, matching the bit-level setting while remaining disjoint from the certificate-mandated HWMCC’24 test corpus. The held-out evaluation corpus 

Beval is the full 319-instance HWMCC’24 bit-level safety 8

archive. This archive is a natural target for CAPDR because HWMCC’24 made independently checkable certificates part of the bit-level safety workflow [2]. No HWMCC’24 evaluation instance contributes training examples, tuning decisions, or online adaptation. 

2) Compared configurations: We distinguish configurations used for development ablations from the frozen configurations used for the held-out headline comparison. Development-stage configurations are: PDR (baseline) , CAPDR (random ranking) ,

CAPDR (CP1 only) , CAPDR (CP1+CP2) , CAPDR (CP1-CP3 full) , CAPDR (CP1-CP3 full) + inv-min , and deterministic 

CAPDR (CP1-CP3 full) + replay for replay-fidelity evaluation only. Evaluation-stage configurations are: PDR (baseline) ,

CAPDR (learned) , and CAPDR (learned) + inv-min . All configurations share the same solver-facing core and differ only in search guidance and optional post-fixpoint minimization. 

3) Implementation, training, and evaluation protocol: We implement CAPDR as a prototype extension of a standard incremental PDR/IC3 engine for AIGER bit-level safety. SAFE results are validated by a standalone SAT-based checker on the discovered CNF invariant, and UNSAFE traces by independent simulation. All solved counts and medians include only checker-accepted results; a verifier claim rejected by the checker is counted as FAIL , not as solved. These runs are internal paired comparisons, not HWMCC standings: host, preprocessing, and checker differ from the competition setup. tchk measures our standalone CNF-invariant checker, not Certifaiger witness-circuit checking. For CP1–CP3, the scorer is a lightweight contextual ranker over verifier-available per-candidate features, including frame index, candidate length for nonconstant-size candidate sets, recency, blocker/push history, and SAT-side statistics. For CP1, examples are blocker candidates C = ¬d⋆ generated from subcubes d⋆ ⊆ d; the model ranks alternatives in C(d, i ) and never proposes clauses outside that verifier-generated set. In ablations, disabled choice-point events are omitted and the remaining scorer is trained by the same procedure. The learned model is fit only on Bdev and evaluated frozen on Beval ; no evaluation benchmark contributes training examples, model selection, tuning decisions, nor online adaptation. The SAFE-only ablation in Table II uses the 190 SAFE benchmarks in Bdev . On Beval , Table I uses all 319 HWMCC’24 benchmarks, Fig. 2a restricts to SAFE benchmarks solved by both baseline PDR and CAPDR, and Fig. 2b restricts to SAFE benchmarks solved by all plotted configurations. Fig. 2c uses the 10-seed SAFE runs satisfying the coverage condition in the stability protocol below. We use base mode throughout, with CP4 disabled. In the prototype, gθ is a linear pairwise ranker trained with an L2-regularized pairwise logistic loss on development-rollout candidate pairs: a pair is labeled only when both alternatives have an observed development cost-to-go or rollout cost, and the candidate with lower scalarized objective J is preferred. Regularization and rollout-budget choices are made only on Bdev .Each campaign records the split manifest, canonical hashes, random seeds, replay logs, frozen-model identifiers, checker outcomes, and per-instance logs used to regenerate Tables I and II and Figs. 2a to 2c. Reported learned-policy runtimes TABLE I: Held-out results on the 319 HWMCC’24 bit-level safety benchmarks. Medians are over each configuration’s checker-accepted solved set. The “Unsolved” column includes timeouts, resource exits, and checker rejections. Lower is better for t, size( π), tchk , and J. The reported median J                                

> is the median of per-run scalarized costs, not Jevaluated on the displayed component medians.
> Configuration Solved Unsolved Med. t[s] Med. size( π)Med. tchk [s] Med. J
> PDR (baseline) 287 32 109.7 19365 1.24 151.1 CAPDR (learned) 293 26 115.2 14596 0.63 142.4 CAPDR + inv-min 293 26 117.5 12785 0.55 140.5

include feature extraction, scoring, and all guard checks, but exclude the one-time offline fitting cost. We ran our experiments on a single Windows 11 machine with an Intel Core i7-11800H CPU and 64 GB RAM, with a per-instance timeout of 1 hour and a memory limit of 56 GB. 

4) Metrics: We report the vector metrics (t, size( π), t chk )

from Section IV-E and, when useful, the scalar objective 

J = αt + β size( π) + γt chk with (α, β, γ ) = (1 , 10 −3, 1) .The factor 10 −3 weights 1000 certificate-size units as one second of scalar cost. The weights are fixed before evaluation, and the underlying vector metrics remain primary. For SAFE instances, size( π) = lit( Inv ) and tchk is measured by the standalone CNF-invariant checker. Since size( π) is outcome-specific, mixed SAFE/UNSAFE summaries in Table I are workflow-level summaries. SAFE-only certificate quality is reported in Table II and Figs. 2a and 2b. 

5) Stability protocol: Unless stated otherwise, solve counts and the medians of t, size( π), and tchk are reported for the fixed primary evaluation seed. The 10-seed campaign is used only for instability and replay-fidelity measurements. Each configuration is run under 10 seeds while varying only low-level solver randomness; verifier-level tie-breaking remains fixed except in the random-ranking control. For each SAFE benchmark, we aggregate all pairwise cross-seed distances 

∆seed  

> Inv

(s, s ′) by the median. Replay is evaluated separately by deterministic re-execution from the recorded log and measuring 

∆replay  

> Inv

against the original artifact. Distances are computed only for seed pairs in which both runs produce SAFE certificates for the same benchmark. Benchmarks with fewer than two SAFE certificates for a configuration are omitted from the distance distribution, while coverage is reported separately. 

B. Results 1) Overall end-to-end results: Table I reports certified end-to-end performance on the held-out evaluation benchmarks under the disjoint development/evaluation protocol from Sec-tion VI-A 3. The key online-search comparison is the baseline row against CAPDR (learned): neither row uses post-fixpoint invariant minimization. Thus the certificate reduction in this comparison comes from CP1–CP3 guidance during PDR search, not from a final cleanup pass. Under the primary evaluation seed, CAPDR reduces unsolved instances from 32 to 26 (six additional checker-accepted solutions), while improving the deliverable substantially: the median certificate proxy shrinks by 24 .6% (19,365 → 14,596) and the median independent checker time drops by 49% (1.24 s 

→ 0.63 s, about 2× faster checking). The median solving time increases by about 5% (109.7 s → 115.2 s), consistent with 910 −0.6 10 −0.5 10 −0.4 10 −0.3 10 −0.2 10 −0.1 10 0 10 0.1 10 0.2 10 0.3 10 0.4 10 0.5 10 0.6 

> 10 −0.6
> 10 −0.4
> 10 −0.2
> 10 0
> 10 0.2
> 10 0.4
> 10 0.6
> Runtime ratio tCAPDR /t PDR
> Invariant literal ratio lit( Inv CAPDR )/lit( Inv PDR )

(a) Per-instance tradeoff on SAFE benchmarks 10 −2 10 −1 10 0 10 1 10 2   

> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> Checker time tchk on SAFE certificates [s]
> Empirical CDF
> PDR
> CAPDR
> CAPDR+inv-min

(b) Checker time distribution on SAFE certificates PDR CAPDR CAPDR+replay  

> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> Instability ∆ Inv

(c) Cross-seed instability and replay fidelity 

Fig. 2: SAFE-certificate quality and reproducibility. (a) Common SAFE subset, with runtime and invariant-size ratios relative to baseline; parity is 1. (b) SAFE-checker-time CDF; left is faster. (c) Cross-seed instability for PDR and CAPDR, and replay-fidelity distance for CAPDR + REPLAY .

spending additional SAT effort on lemma generalization and pushing. Under the fixed weights (α, β, γ ) = (1 , 10 −3, 1) ,these certificate improvements yield a lower median objective (151.1 → 142.4). Post-fixpoint minimization (CAPDR + INV -MIN ) is comple-mentary: it further reduces the median certificate proxy to 12,785 ( 34 .0% below baseline) and cuts median checking time to 0.55 s ( 55 .6% below baseline), with only a small additional runtime overhead (117.5 s median) and unchanged coverage (293 solved). Overall, CAPDR trades a small amount of solving time for substantially smaller and cheaper-to-check certificates. Because the solved sets differ across configurations, the medians in Table I should be read as workflow-level summaries over each configuration’s solved instances. The paired SAFE-instance comparison in Fig. 2a controls for this by restricting to benchmarks solved by both baseline PDR and CAPDR. TABLE II: Development-only SAFE-invariant ablation on Bdev . Medians are over each row’s certified SAFE set. The last column lists cross-seed Jaccard distance, except for the replay row where replay distance is given; lower is better.                                                

> Configuration Certified SAFE Med. t[s] Med. lit( Inv )Med. tchk [s] Med. ∆Inv
> PDR (baseline) 176/190 123.2 16154 3.51 0.43 CAPDR (random ranking) 171/190 135.4 17917 3.75 0.50 CAPDR (CP1 only: blockers) 175/190 125.1 11314 2.21 0.29 CAPDR (CP1+CP2: +obligation order) 178/190 131.4 10336 2.01 0.25 CAPDR (CP1-CP3 full) 179/190 125.3 9620 1.61 0.20 CAPDR (CP1-CP3 full) + inv-min 179/190 127.8 7990 1.31 0.20 CAPDR (CP1-CP3 full) + replay 179/190 125.3 9620 1.61 0.00

2) Ablation on choice points and stability: On the devel-opment split, Table II attributes the certificate gains on SAFE instances to specific PDR choice points and serves both as an ablation study and as a characterization of the policy-design space used for offline fitting. A random ranking policy is a useful negative control: it degrades solvability (171/190 vs. 176/190) and inflates both lit( Inv ) and tchk , confirming that CAPDR’s gains are not an artifact of nondeterminism but of informed decisions. As in Table I, the medians in Table II are computed over each configuration’s own certified SAFE set and should therefore be interpreted jointly with the coverage column, rather than as paired common-subset comparisons. Guiding CP1 (blocker selection/generalization) provides most of the benefit: CP1 alone reduces the median invariant literal count by 30% (16,154 → 11,314) and cuts median checker time by 37% (3.51 s → 2.21 s) with essentially unchanged runtime. Adding guidance at CP2-CP3 yields further improvements, reaching a 40% reduction in lit( Inv ) (16,154 

→ 9,620) and a 54% reduction in checker time (3.51 s →

1.61 s) for the full policy, while also solving three additional SAFE instances (179/190). Stability improves as well: the median cross-seed Jaccard distance drops from 0.43 to 0.20 

(roughly 80% clause-set overlap after canonicalization). Replay addresses a different question: deterministic re-execution from the recorded logs yields med ∆ replay  

> Inv

= 0 on the same SAFE runs, confirming exact artifact-grade reproducibility. 

3) Per-instance tradeoffs, checker cost, and stability: Fig. 2a provides a per-instance view on SAFE benchmarks solved by both baseline PDR and CAPDR. Most points lie below y=1 

(smaller invariants) while remaining close to x=1 (near-parity runtime), showing that the certificate reductions are broad-based rather than driven by a small number of outliers. The few points above y=1 highlight that certificate-aware choices are not universally beneficial, motivating a tunable objective Eq. (16) (via α, β, γ ) rather than runtime-only optimization. Fig. 2b shows the corresponding leftward shift in independent checker time, with CAPDR + INV -MIN improving further. Fig. 2c quantifies how sensitive SAFE certificates are to nondeterminism by plotting the distribution (over SAFE benchmarks) of the invariant-instability metric ∆Inv across 

10 seeds, where ∆Inv is the Jaccard distance between canoni-calized clause sets (Section IV-F ). The baseline PDR exhibits substantial run-to-run variability (wide spread), indicating that different seeds often lead to meaningfully different resulting invariants. In contrast, CAPDR shifts the distribution downward and tightens it, showing that certificate-aware guidance tends to produce more consistent invariants across runs. Finally, enforcing replay collapses the distribution to ∆Inv = 0,demonstrating that the replay log fully determinizes the run and enables artifact-grade reproducibility. VII. C ONCLUSION 

CAPDR makes certificate size, checking cost, and repro-ducibility first-class objectives for PDR/IC3 without adding learning to the trusted computing base. A frozen ranker guides only guard-checked choice points, and SAFE/UNSAFE is reported only after independent certificate acceptance. On held-out HWMCC’24 bit-level safety benchmarks, CAPDR reduces certificate bulk and checker time with modest solving overhead, while replay logs make runs artifact-reproducible. The results support certificate-aware search as a practical complement to certified hardware model checking workflows. 10 

Acknowledgements: 

The research of Arman Ferdowsi was funded in whole or in part by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) 10.55776/ESP1705325. The research of Laura Kov ´acs was funded in whole or in part by the ERC Consolidator Grant ARTIST 101002685, the WWTF Grant ForSmart 10.47379/ICT22007, and the SBA Research COMET Center SBA-K1 NGC managed by the FFG. REFERENCES [1] A. R. Bradley, “Sat-based model checking without unrolling,” in 

Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation (VMCAI 2011) ,ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6538. Springer, 2011, pp. 70–87. [2] N. Froleyks, E. Yu, M. Preiner, A. Biere, and K. Heljanko, “Introducing certificates to the hardware model checking competition,” in Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2025), Proceedings, Part I , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 15931. Springer Nature, 2025, pp. 281–295. [3] A. Biere, N. Froleyks, and M. Preiner, “Hardware model checking competition 2025,” in 2025 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–1. [4] D. Beyer and J. Strej ˇcek, “Improvements in software verification and witness validation: SV-COMP 2025,” in Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS 2025) , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 15698. Springer Nature, 2025, pp. 151–186. [5] G. Hu, J. Tang, C. Yu, W. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “Deepic3: Guiding ic3 algorithms by graph neural network clause prediction,” in 29th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC 2024) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 262–268. [6] Z. Lu, P.-C. Chien, N.-Z. Lee, A. Gurfinkel, and V. Ganesh, “Btor2-Select: Machine learning based algorithm selection for hardware model checking,” in Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2025), Proceedings, Part I , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 15931. Springer Nature, 2025, pp. 296–311. [7] E. Yu, A. Biere, and K. Heljanko, “Progress in certifying hardware model checking results,” in International Conference on Computer Aided Verification . Springer, 2021, pp. 363–386. [8] E. Yu, N. Froleyks, A. Biere, and K. Heljanko, “Stratified certification for k-induction,” in 2022 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 59–64. [9] N. Froleyks, E. Yu, A. Biere, and K. Heljanko, “Certifying phase abstraction,” in Automated Reasoning (IJCAR 2024), Proceedings, Part I, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 14739. Springer Nature, 2024, pp. 284–303. [10] E. Yu, N. Froleyks, A. Biere, and K. Heljanko, “Towards compositional hardware model checking certification,” in Proceedings of the 23rd Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD 2023) . TU Wien Academic Press, 2023, pp. 44–54. [11] A. Ivrii, A. Gurfinkel, and A. Belov, “Small inductive safe invariants,” in 2014 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD) . IEEE, 2014, pp. 115–122. [12] A. Mebsout and C. Tinelli, “Proof certificates for smt-based model checkers for infinite-state systems,” in 2016 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD) . IEEE, 2016, pp. 117–124. [13] A. Griggio, M. Roveri, and S. Tonetta, “Certifying proofs for sat-based model checking,” Formal Methods in System Design , vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 178–210, 2021. [14] N. Froleyks and A. Biere, “Single clause assumption without activation literals to speed-up ic3,” in Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD 2021) . TU Wien Academic Press, 2021, pp. 72–76. [15] Y. Xia, A. Becchi, A. Cimatti, A. Griggio, J. Li, and G. Pu, “Searching for i-good lemmas to accelerate safety model checking,” in Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2023), Proceedings, Part II , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13965. Springer Nature, 2023, pp. 288–308. [16] A. Luka and Y. Vizel, “Property directed reachability with extended resolution,” in Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2025), Proceedings, Part I , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 15931. Springer Nature, 2025, pp. 258–280. [17] Y. Su, Q. Yang, Y. Ci, Y. Li, T. Bu, and Z. Huang, “Deeply optimizing the SAT solver for the IC3 algorithm,” in Computer Aided Verification (CAV 2025), Proceedings, Part I , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 15931. Springer Nature, 2025, pp. 237–257. [18] R. Dureja, A. Gurfinkel, A. Ivrii, and Y. Vizel, “Ic3 with internal signals,” in 2021 Formal Methods in Computer Aided Design (FMCAD) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 63–71. [19] Y. Su, Q. Yang, and Y. Ci, “Predicting lemmas in generalization of IC3,” in Proceedings of the 61st ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC 2024) . ACM, 2024, pp. 208:1–208:6. [20] M. Miao, G. Hu, W. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “Legend: A data-driven framework for lemma generation in hardware model checking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.24010 , 2026. [21] M. Miao, G. Hu, Z. Yang, and H. Zhang, “Ic3-evolve: Proof-/witness-gated offline llm-driven heuristic evolution for ic3 hardware model checking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.03232 , 2026. [22] N. Wetzler, M. J. H. Heule, and J. Warren A. Hunt, “Drat-trim: Efficient checking and trimming using expressive clausal proofs,” in Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing (SAT 2014) , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8561. Springer, 2014, pp. 422–429. [23] L. Cruz-Filipe, M. J. H. Heule, J. Warren A. Hunt, M. Kaufmann, and P. Schneider-Kamp, “Efficient certified rat verification,” in Automated Deduction (CADE 26) , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10395. Springer, 2017, pp. 220–236. [24] F. Pollitt, M. Fleury, and A. Biere, “Faster lrat checking than solving with cadical,” in 26th International Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing (SAT 2023) , ser. Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs). Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum f ¨ur Informatik, 2023. [25] P. Lammich, “Fast and verified unsat certificate checking,” in Automated Reasoning (IJCAR 2024), Proceedings, Part I , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 14739. Springer Nature, 2024, pp. 439–457. [26] C. R. Codel, J. Avigad, and M. J. Heule, “Verified substitution redundancy checking,” in 2024 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD) .IEEE, 2024, pp. 186–196. [27] H.-J. Schurr, M. Fleury, H. Barbosa, and P. Fontaine, “Alethe: Towards a generic smt proof format,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02354 , 2021. [28] B. Andreotti, H. Lachnitt, and H. Barbosa, “Carcara: An efficient proof checker and elaborator for smt proofs in the alethe format,” in Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS 2023), Part I , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13993. Springer Nature, 2023, pp. 367–386. [29] H. Lachnitt, M. Fleury, H. Barbosa, J. Jakpor, B. Andreotti, A. Reynolds, H.-J. Schurr, C. Barrett, and C. Tinelli, “Improving the smt proof reconstruction pipeline in isabelle/hol,” in 16th International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP 2025) , ser. Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), vol. 352. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ ur Informatik, 2025, pp. 26:1–26:22. [30] A. Mohamed, T. Mascarenhas, H. Khan, H. Barbosa, A. Reynolds, Y. Qian, C. Tinelli, and C. Barrett, “Lean-smt: An smt tactic for discharging proof goals in lean,” in International Conference on Computer Aided Verification . Springer, 2025, pp. 197–212. [31] S. Hitarth, C. R. Codel, H. Lachnitt, and B. Dutertre, “Extending drat to smt,” in Proceedings of the 24th Conference on Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD 2024) . TU Wien Academic Press, 2024, pp. 18–28. [32] A. R. Bradley, “Understanding ic3,” in International Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing . Springer, 2012, pp. 1–14. [33] N. E ´en, A. Mishchenko, and R. Brayton, “Efficient implementation of property directed reachability,” in 2011 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD) . IEEE, 2011, pp. 125–134. [34] A. Biere, N. Froleyks, and M. Preiner, “Hardware Model Checking Com-petition 2020,” https://fmv.jku.at/hwmcc20/, 2020, benchmark archive and results. 11 

APPENDIX AFULL OPERATIONAL PSEUDOCODE 

This appendix spells out the base-mode control flow of CAPDR, making explicit where policy-guided choices occur, where SAT guards are enforced, and where independent checker acceptance is required before reporting SAFE or UNSAFE. 

Algorithm 1 CAPDR core loop in base mode. 

1: /* Trivial counterexample of length 0 */ 

2: if SAT (Init (X) ∧ ¬ Prop (X)) then 

3: extract an initial bad state x0 from the model 

4: set π ← (x0)

5: if the UNSAFE checker accepts π then 

6: return UNSAFE with π

7: else 

8: return FAIL 

9: Initialize F0 ← Init ; F1 ← Prop ; set k ← 0

10: Create further frames lazily; when Fk+1 is first created, initialize it as Prop 

11: Initialize obligation multiset Q ← ∅ 

12: while true do 

13: if SAT (Fk (X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ ¬ Prop (X′)) then 

14: extract the bad-successor state cube d over X by unpriming the model’s X′

> assignment

15: insert obligation (k+1 , d ) into Q

16: while Q̸ = ∅ do 

17: choose and remove an obligation (i, d ) from Q ▷ policy-guided, fair 

18: if i = 0 or SAT (Init (X) ∧ d(X)) then 

19: reconstruct a trace π ending in ¬Prop using the stored successor links and input witnesses 

20: if the UNSAFE checker accepts π then 

21: return UNSAFE with π

22: else 

23: return FAIL 

24: if SAT (Fi−1(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ d(X′)) then 

25: extract the predecessor state cube dpred over X from the model’s X

> assignment

26: store the predecessor/input witness information 

27: reinsert (i, d ) into Q and insert (i−1, d pred ) into Q

28: else 

29: construct candidate generalized blockers C(d, i ), i.e., clauses C =      

> ¬d⋆for subcubes d⋆⊆d, with ¬d∈ C (d, i )

30: order C(d, i ) by policy score ▷ fallback to deterministic order 

31: for candidates C in that order do 

32: if UNSAT (Init (X) ∧ ¬ C(X)) and UNSAT (Fi−1(X) ∧  

> Trans (X, U, X ′)∧ ¬ C(X′)) then

33: add C to frames F1, . . . , F i

34: break ▷ guaranteed by C = ¬d after the initial-state check 

35: else 

36: attempt pushing learned clauses across frames F1, . . . , F k using guard Eq. (15) ▷ policy-guided order 

37: if Fk ≡ Fk+1 (canon (Fk ) = canon (Fk+1 )) then 

38: extract Inv ← Fk

39: optionally minimize Inv by keeping only edits that preserve the three SAFE-checker SAT conditions 

40: if the SAFE checker accepts Inv then 

41: return SAFE with Inv 

42: else 

43: return FAIL 

44: else 

45: increment k ← k+1 and initialize Fk+1 ← Prop if needed 

It is worth noting that according to Proposition 1, the blocking loop in Algorithm 1 is guaranteed to accept some guard-validated candidate independently of the policy’s ranking. APPENDIX BDEFERRED PROOFS 

For completeness, this appendix restates all main proposi-tions, theorems, and corollaries from the paper and provides their full proofs. 

A. Frame preservation by guarded clause insertion 

Suppose C satisfies Eqs. (12) to (14) for an obligation (i, d ),and let bFj = Fj ∧ C for 1 ≤ j ≤ i, while bFj = Fj otherwise. The boundary F0 ⇒ F1 is preserved by Init ⇒ C. Boundaries 

1 ≤ j < i are strengthened on both sides, and later boundaries are either strengthened only in the antecedent or unchanged; hence monotonicity is preserved. For any closed consecution index j < k , if j + 1 ≤ i, the consequent frame is strengthened by C. Old consecution gives 

Fj+1 (X′), and monotonicity gives Fj ⇒ Fi−1, so Eq. (14) gives C(X′). If j + 1 > i , the consequent is unchanged and the antecedent is only strengthened or unchanged, so old consecution suffices. Finally, Fj ⇒ Prop is preserved because strengthening frames cannot introduce new states. 

Push preservation: If C ∈ Fi and Fi(X) ∧

Trans (X, U, X ′) ⇒ C(X′), then adding C to Fi+1 

preserves monotonicity because Fi ⇒ C, and it preserves consecution at level i by the push guard. Other closed consecution obligations are unchanged or only strengthened in the antecedent. 

B. Technical proofs 

Proposition 1 (Base blocker is admissible after the initial-state check) . If i > 0, UNSAT (Init (X) ∧ d(X)) , and the predeces-sor query Eq. (11) for an obligation (i, d ) is UNSAT, then the base clause C0 ≜ ¬d satisfies Eqs. (12) to (14) .Proof. Let C0 ≜ ¬d. Since d is a state cube over X,we have d(X) ⇒ ¬C0(X), so C0 satisfies the blocking condition Eq. (12). Since UNSAT (Init (X) ∧ d(X)) , we have Init (X) ⇒¬d(X). Because C0 = ¬d, this is exactly the initiation condi-tion Eq. (13). For the relative-inductiveness guard, consider 

UNSAT  Fi−1(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ ¬ C0(X′).

Because C0(X′) = ¬d(X′), this is equivalent to 

UNSAT  Fi−1(X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ d(X′),

which is exactly the predecessor query Eq. (11), assumed UNSAT. Hence C0 satisfies Eq. (14). Finally, ¬d ∈ C (d, i ) by construction, and the blocking loop scans the finite ordered candidate list until it finds a candidate satisfying the initiation and relative-inductiveness guards. Since C0 satisfies both, the loop must accept some candidate regardless of the policy ranking. 

Theorem 1 (SAFE certificate soundness in base mode) . If the SAFE checker in base mode accepts an invariant Inv , then the transition system satisfies the safety property Prop .Proof. Assume the SAFE checker in base mode accepts 

Inv . Then, by definition of checker acceptance, the formulas Eqs. (17) to (19) are UNSAT. Equivalently, 

Init (X) ⇒ Inv (X),

Inv (X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ⇒ Inv (X′),

Inv (X) ⇒ Prop (X).

Let x be any reachable state. By definition of reachability, there exist k ≥ 0, states x0, . . . , x k, and inputs u0, . . . , u k−1

such that Init (x0), Trans (xi, u i, x i+1 ) for all i < k , and 12 

xk = x. We prove by induction on i ∈ { 0, . . . , k } that Inv (xi)

holds. 

Base case ( i = 0 ): Since Init (x0) and Init ⇒ Inv , we have 

Inv (x0).

Inductive step: Assume Inv (xi) holds for some i < k . Since 

Trans (xi, u i, x i+1 ) holds and Inv (X) ∧ Trans (X, U, X ′) ⇒

Inv (X′), it follows that Inv (xi+1 ) holds. Thus Inv (xk) holds. Since xk = x and Inv ⇒ Prop , we obtain Prop (x). Because x was an arbitrary reachable state, every reachable state satisfies Prop . Therefore the system is safe. 

Proposition 2 (Soundness under conservative exten-sion) . Assume Def satisfies Eq. (4) -Eq. (5) , and let 

(Init ext , Trans ext , Prop ) be the extended system from Sec-tion IV-B . If the SAFE checker accepts an invariant Inv (X, Y )

for the extended system, then the original transition system 

(Init (X), Trans (X, U, X ′), Prop (X)) is safe. Proof. Let x = xk be reachable in the original system. Then there exist k ≥ 0 and a sequence x0, u 0, x 1, . . . , u k−1, x k such that Init (x0) and Trans (xi, u i, x i+1 ) for all i < k .We prove by induction on the prefix length j ∈ { 0, . . . , k }

that there exist y0, . . . , y j such that Init ext (x0, y 0) holds and 

Trans ext (xi, u i, y i, x i+1 , y i+1 ) holds for all i < j .For j = 0, Init (x0) and Eq. (4) yield some y0 with 

Def (x0, y 0), hence Init ext (x0, y 0).For the inductive step, assume the claim holds for some j < k. In particular, we have Def (xj , y j ) and Trans (xj , u j , x j+1 ).By Eq. (5) there exists yj+1 with Def (xj+1 , y j+1 ). By definition of Trans ext , this implies 

Trans ext (xj , u j , y j , x j+1 , y j+1 ).

Thus the claim holds for j + 1 .Therefore there exist y0, . . . , y k such that 

(x0, y 0), . . . , (xk, y k) is an execution of the extended system. Since the SAFE checker accepts Inv (X, Y ) on the extended system, checker acceptance gives 

Init ext (X, Y ) ⇒ Inv (X, Y ),

Inv (X, Y ) ∧ Trans ext (X, U, Y, X ′, Y ′) ⇒ Inv (X′, Y ′),

and 

Inv (X, Y ) ⇒ Prop (X).

Hence, by induction along the lifted execution, Inv (xk, y k)

holds, and therefore Prop (xk) holds. Since xk = x was an arbitrary reachable original state, all reachable original states satisfy Prop . Thus the original transition system is safe. 

Theorem 2 (UNSAFE certificate soundness) . If the UNSAFE checker accepts a trace π, the transition system violates Prop .Proof. Let π = ( x0, u 0, x 1, . . . , u k−1, x k) be a trace accepted by the UNSAFE checker. By the checker’s definition: (i) 

Init (x0) holds, (ii) for all i < k , Trans (xi, u i, x i+1 ) holds, and (iii) ¬Prop (xk) holds. Items (i) and (ii) together show that x0, . . . , x k is a concrete execution of the transition system. Item (iii) shows the final state violates the safety property. Therefore there exists a reachable state violating Prop , so the system is unsafe. 

Theorem 3 (CAPDR soundness) . Assuming assumptions A1-A2,  

> •

If CAPDR returns SAFE with a certificate accepted by the appropriate SAFE checker (base mode or extension mode), then the original transition system satisfies Prop . 

> •

If CAPDR returns UNSAFE with a certificate accepted by the UNSAFE checker, then the original transition system violates Prop .Proof. If CAPDR returns SAFE in base mode, it does so only after the base SAFE checker accepts Inv . By Theorem 1, the original system satisfies Prop .If CAPDR returns SAFE in extension mode, it does so only after the extension-mode SAFE checker accepts (Def , Inv ).By definition of that checker, Inv is accepted on the extended system and Def is validated against a criterion that guaran-tees Eqs. (4) and (5). Hence Proposition 2 applies, and the original system satisfies Prop .If CAPDR returns UNSAFE, it does so only after the UNSAFE checker accepts π. By Theorem 2, the original system violates Prop .

Corollary 1. Under assumptions A1-A2, CAPDR is sound regardless of the learned policy. Proof. The learned policy is consulted only inside the untrusted search procedure. Whatever ranking it returns, every clause insertion, push, or optional extension is committed only through the verifier’s guarded control logic, and CAPDR reports SAFE or UNSAFE only after the corresponding independent checker accepts the emitted artifact. Hence the certificate-level hypotheses used in Theorem 3 are unchanged by the choice of policy. Therefore every SAFE/UNSAFE result returned by CAPDR is correct regardless of the learned policy. APPENDIX CAUXILIARY -V ARIABLE EXTENSION MODE 

Some strengthening techniques (e.g., extended-resolution-style reasoning) introduce auxiliary Boolean state variables Y .To keep certificates unambiguous while preserving soundness for the original transition system over X, we support two conservative modes:  

> •

Projection mode: emit an X-only candidate invariant 

Inv X (X) obtained from the internal auxiliary-rich repre-sentation by some elimination procedure; correctness is not assumed from that elimination step itself, but solely from subsequent acceptance by the base SAFE checker.  

> •

Extension mode: emit an invariant Inv (X, Y ) together with an auxiliary-state relation Def (X, Y ).In extension mode, let Def ′(X′, Y ′) denote the primed copy of Def (X, Y ), and define the extended system: 

Init ext (X, Y ) ≜Init (X) ∧ Def (X, Y ),

Trans ext (X, U, Y, X ′, Y ′) ≜Trans (X, U, X ′) ∧ Def (X, Y )

∧ Def ′(X′, Y ′).13 

We require Def to be a conservative extension of the original dynamics under projection to X, i.e., 

∀x. Init (x) ⇒ ∃ y. Def (x, y ), (20) 

∀x, u, x ′, y.  Trans (x, u, x ′) ∧ Def (x, y ) ⇒ ∃ y′. Def (x′, y ′).

(21) In extension mode, the emitted SAFE certificate is the pair (Def , Inv (X, Y )) . The independent checker must val-idate both components: (i) it checks Inv on the extended system (Init ext , Trans ext , Prop ), and (ii) it validates that Def 

witnesses a conservative auxiliary-variable extension of the original system by a dedicated procedure whose correctness guarantees Eqs. (4) and (5). Only after both checks succeed may the checker accept the certificate. Under these conditions, acceptance of an extended certificate implies safety of the original system. We formalize this projection argument in Proposition 2. Projection mode emits an X-only candidate invariant and validates it with the base SAFE checker. Extension mode uses the auxiliary-aware checker above. APPENDIX DDEFERRED FORMALIZATION OF THE LOCAL OBJECTIVE 

Fix a deployment-time control law for the remainder of the run after the first action (e.g., the frozen scorer together with the verifier’s deterministic fallback and fairness logic). The global objective Eq. (16) then induces the ideal local action value 

QJ (e, a ) ≜ −E[J | e, a is selected first and the fixed control law is used thereafter ] (a ∈ A),

where the expectation is over the remaining solver and system nondeterminism. For development labels, a rollout that times out or whose emitted artifact is rejected by the checker is assigned a fixed penalty Jfail larger than every completed checker-accepted de-velopment run, equivalently a PAR-λ-style timeout penalty may be used. This convention is used only to form training/ranking labels; reported solved-set medians in Section VI are computed only from checker-accepted runs. CAPDR does not compute QJ exactly online. Instead it uses score θ (ϕ, a ) ≜ gθ (ψ(ϕ, a )) ∈ R, where ψ(ϕ, a ) is a verifier-available feature vector and θ are the learned parameters. Higher scores are intended to be order-consistent surrogates for larger QJ (e, a ), i.e., lower expected eventual objective 

J. For CP1 and CP3, the engine scans candidates in this deterministic score order until either a guard-validated action is committed or the ordered list is exhausted. For CP2, it selects the highest-ranked obligation subject to the fairness policy. In CP1, exhaustion cannot cause deadlock after the initial-state check: if UNSAT (Init (X) ∧ d(X)) and Eq. (11) is UNSAT, then ¬d ∈ C (d, i ) satisfies both Eqs. (13) and (14) by Proposition 1. APPENDIX EEXACT INSTABILITY AND REPLAY -F IDELITY FORMULAS 

For SAFE certificates, let canon (Inv ) be the clause set obtained by sorting literals within each clause, deleting repeated literals within a clause, and deleting duplicate clauses. For seeds s, s ′, define the cross-seed instability                      

> ∆seed
> Inv (s, s ′)≜
> 
> 0,if canon (Inv s)∪
> canon (Inv s′) = ∅,
> 1− |canon (Inv s)∩canon (Inv s′)||canon (Inv s)∪canon (Inv s′)|,otherwise.

This is the Jaccard distance on canonicalized clause sets and measures run-to-run certificate instability across seeds. For a run executed with seed s, let Inv replay  

> s

be the certificate produced by deterministic re-execution from the replay log recorded for that same run. Define the replay-fidelity distance                      

> ∆replay
> Inv (s)≜
> 
> 0,if canon (Inv s)∪
> canon (Inv replay
> s) = ∅,
> 1− |canon (Inv s)∩canon (Inv replay
> s)||canon (Inv s)∪canon (Inv replay
> s)|,otherwise.

Exact replay corresponds to ∆replay  

> Inv

(s) = 0 . We use ∆seed 

> Inv

for stability evaluation and ∆replay  

> Inv

for replay validation; they measure different phenomena and are reported separately.