Title: AI-Assisted Completion of CertiGC Proofs: An Experience Report

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.21167v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 00:37:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# AI-Assisted Completion of CertiGC Proofs: An Experience Report 

SHENGYI WANG, Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, China This experience report describes the Codex-assisted completion and stabilization of a substantial Rocq (formerly Coq) proof development for CertiGC, the verified generational garbage collector in the CertiGraph project. The development extends the collector from an effectively immutable setting to a mutable one by adding remembered-set forwarding to the collection path and re-establishing the top-level graph-isomorphism correctness theorem. The central technical issue was not low-level proof scripting alone: mutable updates invalidate the old global no-backward-edge assumption, so the proof had to be reorganized around a recorded-backward-edge invariant stating that every backward edge is recorded in the appropriate remembered-set component. This case differs from recent AI-assisted formal-proof accounts: unlike the adaptation of a nearby compiler-proof architecture or a fresh metatheory formalization, it completes a long-running verification in a mature codebase built on the Verified Software Toolchain (VST) and CertiGraph, both mechanized in Rocq. The Rocq kernel remained the arbiter of correctness, while our role shifted toward adjudicating invariant proposals, constraining specification changes, reviewing theorem statements, and deciding when proof cleanup was justified. The Codex-assisted phase repaired the VST relation proofs first, then restored the mathematical graph-isomorphism theorem, and only then audited the premise path from the VST specification to the theorem. That audit found and removed a stale no-backward-edge condition from the VST-facing proof path. This report presents the workflow, resulting proof artifact, and lessons for agentic proof maintenance. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models are now routinely used as programming assistants, and proof engineering is beginning to adopt the same style of assistance. In ordinary software development, compilation is only a weak check on behavior. In formal verification, by contrast, a proof script accepted by the kernel establishes its stated theorem. The central risk is therefore not that one must trust the generated proof script, but that the definitions, theorem statement, or specification boundary may no longer express the intended result. A silently weakened theorem, an inappropriate new precondition, or a specification change can make a checked proof certify the wrong property. This does not make review automatic, but it changes its scale: the theorem statements, together with the definitions and specification boundaries they mention, are far more concise than the proof scripts themselves. This paper reports on a concrete proof-engineering experience in that setting: using OpenAI Codex [OpenAI 2025, 2026] to help complete the mutable-garbage-collector branch of CertiGC. CertiGC is part of the CertiGraph development [Wang et al . 2019], which uses the Verified Software Toolchain (VST) [Appel et al . 2014] and Rocq to verify C programs manipulating heap-represented graphs. Rocq is the proof assistant formerly named Coq. The collector is a generational copying collector. The original CertiGC proof did not cover mutable references or updatable arrays, whose updates can create pointers from older objects to younger ones after allocation. The mutable extension adds a write barrier and remembered sets, giving the collector the extra information needed to handle such updates. Figure 1 gives the big-picture map for the repaired mutable branch and marks the division of work reported here. The left column shows the C call graph for the repaired generational collection code, including the remembered-set path inside do_generation . The middle column pairs each function with the corresponding VST proof file and abstract effect; the right column shows shared    

> Author’s Contact Information: Shengyi Wang, Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai, China, wangshengyi@sqz.ac.cn.
> arXiv:2606.21167v1 [cs.PL] 19 Jun 2026 2Shengyi Wang
> C Functions VST Proof Files / Abstract Effects Shared Model / Final Theorem
> garbage_collect
> do_generation
> forward_remset
> forward_roots
> do_scan
> forward
> verif_garbage_collect.v
> garbage_collect_relation
> verif_do_generation.v
> do_generation_relation
> verif_forward_remset.v
> forward_remset_gh
> verif_forward_roots.v
> forward_roots_relation
> verif_do_scan.v
> do_scan_relation
> verif_forward.v
> forward_relation
> GCGraph.v
> spatial_gcgraph.v
> gc_spec.v
> gc_correct.v
> garbage_collect_isomorphism
> Legend
> C call
> proof/contract link
> pre-existing artifact
> Codex-assisted repair

Fig. 1. Mutable-collector proof map. 

graph and specification files feeding the final theorem in gc_correct.v . Unshaded boxes mark pre-existing artifacts; shaded boxes mark proof and model artifacts repaired with Codex assistance. The work began as a conventional human proof effort to strengthen the implementation, specifi-cation, and proof for mutable references. By the time Codex was used, the branch already contained substantial pre-existing artifacts, shown unshaded in Figure 1. They included lower-level collector proofs for forward , forward_roots , and do_scan , along with human-written mutable-collector additions: remembered-set data structures, mutator-side write-barrier specification work, a refactor-ing of thread information to carry remembered-set state, and a verified forward_remset function for processing remembered-set entries. The remaining Codex-assisted work was to repair the shaded proof and model artifacts and clean them up. This phase used Codex as an agentic coding tool: it read the codebase, edited proof files, ran make , diagnosed errors, proposed helper lemmas, and performed cleanup. The goal was not merely to produce local proof-script fragments, but to state the final theorem correctly and have its proof accepted by the Rocq kernel. The Codex-assisted development was organized around three main proof tasks. First, the VST proof of do_generation had to incorporate the remembered-set forward_remset function call and expose the right abstract relation. Second, the outer garbage_collect VST proof had to use that restored relation while preserving remembered-set invariants across collection and reset. Third, 

gc_correct.v had to re-establish that the abstract collection relation still preserves roots-level graph isomorphism. The main theorem was accepted before the end of the effort, but later work still mattered. That later work audited assumptions, removed a stale no-backward-edge premise from the specification path, and simplified the theorem’s supporting proof structure. The experience was inspired by a recent report [Paraskevopoulou 2026] on using Claude Code to mechanize an ANF transformation correctness proof for CertiCoq. That paper showed that an agentic assistant can adapt an existing compiler-proof technique to a new transformation and produce a machine-checked proof in a few days. This report examines a different point in the design space. Codex did not start by adapting a nearby proof architecture whose central assumptions remained valid. Instead, it worked inside an existing systems-verification development where mutable updates invalidated the old collector invariant, turning the task into proof repair rather than proof-architecture adaptation. AI-Assisted Completion of CertiGC Proofs 3

The report is intended as a focused experience report rather than a controlled study. We contribute the following lessons about agent-assisted proof maintenance: 

• We document an invariant-repair case in which the central problem was not to adapt a related proof architecture, but to replace a semantic assumption made false by mutation while preserving the final roots-level graph-isomorphism theorem. 

• We describe a concrete division of labor: Codex proposed the recorded-backward-edge invariant and helped implement its preservation, while we judged that invariant to be the right specification for the mutable collector. 

• We report transcript-derived interaction statistics and explain how those statistics should be interpreted as evidence of supervised, checker-driven proof maintenance rather than autonomous proof generation. 

• We compare this experience with a recent LLM-assisted compiler-proof experience report and identify lessons specific to maintaining large VST/CertiGraph proofs. The claim is not autonomous proof discovery. Rather, the claim is that agentic assistance can materially help with checker-driven proof repair when candidate invariants and specification changes are continuously reviewed by a human proof engineer. 

2 Background: CertiGC, VST, and Remembered Sets 

CertiGraph [Wang et al . 2019] provides a framework for verifying graph-manipulating C programs: abstract graphs are represented in Rocq, while separation-logic predicates connect those graphs to concrete heap layouts. CertiGC is the generational garbage collector in that development. Its proof uses VST’s Verifiable C program logic [Appel et al . 2014], whose soundness theorem connects the logic to CompCert’s C semantics [Leroy 2009]. A companion manuscript gives a fuller account of the CertiGC C collector, its specification, and the underlying Rocq proofs [Wang et al. 2026]. The rest of this section supplies the background needed to read Figure 1: how the original collection path differs from the mutable path, and why that difference forced an invariant change. Generational collection relies on the observation that most objects die young [Jones et al . 2023, Chapter 9]. The heap is divided into generations ordered by age; collecting a younger generation copies its live objects to an older target generation and redirects later uses to the copies. In CertiGC, 

garbage_collect invokes do_generation for the generation currently being collected. In the orig-inal collection path, do_generation called forward_roots and do_scan , but not forward_remset .

forward_roots follows ordinary program roots, while do_scan follows fields of already copied objects. Both ultimately use forward , which copies a referenced live object to the target generation. That original path matched the effectively immutable setting that CertiGC first verified. Once a graph cell had been allocated, its pointer fields were not updated, so an older object could not later acquire a pointer to a younger object. The proof could therefore rely on the absence of old-to-young edges, usually stated as a no_backward_edge invariant. Mutable updates, as used for ML-style references or lazy thunk update, invalidate that invariant. A program may update a field in an older object to point to a younger object. If the collector only follows ordinary roots and scans copied objects, such a younger object can be missed: the old object that points to it is outside the younger generation being collected and need not be scanned. The mutable branch handles this case by recording old-to-young pointer writes in a remembered set of source field locations and, as Figure 1 shows, by adding forward_remset to the do_generation 

path before forward_roots and do_scan . During collection, forward_remset treats recorded locations as root-like sources and forwards the younger objects they reach. With this ordering, subsequent root forwarding and scanning compute the complete reachability closure from both ordinary program roots and locations recorded in remembered sets. 4 Shengyi Wang 

For the proof, this program change did more than create new proof-script obligations. Keeping the old no-backward-edge invariant would make the proof easier, but it would verify only heaps that exclude the behavior the mutable extension is meant to support. The repair therefore had to change the specification path itself: the old claim that no old-to-young edges exist had to be replaced by the weaker recorded-backward-edge invariant, which permits only recorded old-to-young edges. A concrete instance fixes the direction of the invariant before the formal definitions. Suppose field k of an object x in generation 2 is updated to point to an object y in generation 0. This creates an old-to-young edge: x is not part of the generation being collected, but y may still need to survive that collection. The write barrier records the source location (x,k) in generation 0’s remembered-set component. When generation 0 is collected, forward_remset reads such recorded locations, follows the pointers stored there, and treats the targets as additional root-like sources. The predicate below formalizes this obligation. At the specification level, this repair keeps the ordinary heap condition and the remembered-set invariant separate. The former remains a graph/heap well-formedness condition that says nothing about remembered-set state: 

> Definition garbage_collect_condition (g: LGraph) (h : part_heap) : Prop := graph_unmarked g /\ no_dangling_dst g /\ ti_size_spec h.

The mutable-collector obligation is stated by a separate predicate. It says that every old-to-young edge is represented in the appropriate remembered set: 

> Definition no_unrecorded_backward_edge (g: LGraph) (rh: remset_heap): Prop := forall e, graph_has_e g e -> (egeneration e > vgeneration (dst g e))%nat -> In (RemSetInterior (InteriorVertexPos (fst e) (Z.of_nat (snd e)))) (nth_remset_space rh (vgeneration (dst g e))).

In this definition, the comparison egeneration e > vgeneration (dst g e) selects old-to-young edges: the edge starts in an older generation and points into a younger one. The conclusion then requires the source field position to occur in the remembered-set space indexed by the destination generation. Thus the predicate says that every old-to-young pointer field that may matter to a later collection has a remembered-set entry for the generation it points into. The separation between garbage_collect_condition and this predicate makes clear which assumptions concern ordinary graph/heap well-formedness and which concern mutable-collector remembered-set state. This predicate is the recorded-backward-edge invariant used below. Codex first proposed and formalized the predicate during the repair session; we accepted it after semantic review as the right replacement for the old no-backward-edge condition. 

3 The Proof Task 

The proof task spans two layers of the CertiGC development. The VST layer reasons about concrete C states through separation-logic resources and proves that functions such as do_generation 

and garbage_collect implement abstract graph relations in GCGraph.v . The mathematical layer, especially gc_correct.v , reasons about those abstract graphs and proves that collection preserves the live, roots-reachable part of the graph up to isomorphism. The repair had to keep C specifications, abstract relations, and the graph-isomorphism theorem in sync. In the remembered-set development, rh denotes the abstract remembered-set heap threaded through the graph relations. The variable rmst denotes remembered-set state used by compatibility predicates that connect this heap to the graph and to the VST-facing representation invariants. AI-Assisted Completion of CertiGC Proofs 5

This bridge explains why both remembered-set components appear in the theorem below even though neither appears in its observable conclusion. The central proof target was the following theorem. Its hypotheses expose the new remembered-set assumptions, while its conclusion retains the original roots-level graph-isomorphism property: 

> Theorem garbage_collect_isomorphism: forall roots1 roots2 g1 h1 rh1 rmst1 g2 h2 rh2 rmst2, graph_unmarked g1 -> no_unrecorded_backward_edge g1 rh1 -> no_dangling_dst g1 -> roots_graph_compatible roots1 g1 -> sound_gc_graph g1 -> remset_graph_state g1 O rmst1 rh1 -> remset_heap_covers_graph g1 rh1 -> garbage_collect_relation roots1 roots2 g1 h1 rh1 rmst1 g2 h2 rh2 rmst2 -> gc_graph_iso g1 roots1 g2 roots2.

Here the remembered-set heap and state variables are needed to state collector-private invariants in the hypotheses and relation. The observable conclusion, however, is still the ordinary roots-level graph-isomorphism claim. The two graph arguments g1 and g2 are the pre- and post-collection graphs; h1 /h2 and rh1 /rh2 are the corresponding ordinary heaps and remembered-set heaps, and 

O is the initial generation index. This separation is deliberate: remembered-set bookkeeping is internal collector state, so exposing it in the user-facing theorem would make the result less useful. The invariant flow is as follows. A mutable update may create an edge from an older generation to a younger one. The write barrier records the location of that edge in the remembered-set space for the destination generation. During generation collection, forward_remset interprets those recorded locations and forwards the target objects. Subsequent root forwarding and scanning then compute the reachability closure from both program roots and locations recorded in remembered sets. After the generation is collected and its remembered-set component is reset, the proof must re-establish that any remaining backward edge is still recorded in the appropriate remembered set. Resetting is safe only because the collected generation no longer contains the live destination objects that would require entries in the reset component; backward edges into other generations use remembered-set components that are not reset. Thus remembered-set entries are treated as additional roots during collection. The hard part was to bridge remembered-set forwarding, root forwarding, scanning, and reset into the graph-isomorphism proof. Forwarding remembered-set entries temporarily turns recorded old-to-young edges into effective roots. The one-generation argument proves isomorphism for ordinary roots augmented with those effective roots. Because gc_graph_iso observes only the subgraph reachable from its listed roots, the proof then restricts this augmented-root isomor-phism back to ordinary roots. After that restriction, the reset proof must show that resetting the collected generation’s remembered-set component does not leave any remaining backward edge unrecorded. Under the usual graph and remembered-set compatibility hypotheses, the key preservation lemma has the following abridged shape. Codex introduced this form of lemma as the VST-facing reset-preservation fact once the recorded-backward-edge invariant was accepted; we reviewed its semantic role and later directed the core-and-wrapper factoring of related reset-preservation lemmas.      

> Lemma do_generation_relation_no_unrecorded_backward_edge_reset: ... -> no_unrecorded_backward_edge g rh -> remset_compatible g outlier i rmst rh h -> do_generation_relation i (S i) roots roots '
> g h rh rmst g_rem h_rem rh 'rmst 'g'h'-> no_unrecorded_backward_edge g '(reset_nth_remset_heap i rh ').

6 Shengyi Wang 

This statement says that one-generation collection may consume the current generation’s remembered set and reset it, but the resulting graph and remembered-set heap still satisfy the recorded-backward-edge invariant needed by the outer garbage-collection loop. The repair therefore required a change in proof architecture, not just patches to broken proof scripts: 

• remove the invalid global no_backward_edge condition; 

• introduce and preserve no_unrecorded_backward_edge ;

• make remembered-set entries act as temporary roots during generation copying; 

• keep the top-level theorem framed as graph isomorphism over ordinary roots; 

• repair the VST verification files so that the C code and mathematical relation agree. Table 1 gives the proof architecture used to organize the repair. The same invariant appears differently in each proof component: as spatial resources in VST proofs, as graph facts in the invariant library, as premises of the abstract collection relation, and finally as assumptions of the mathematical theorem. This is why theorem-only repair was insufficient. 

Table 1. Proof components and their repair roles.               

> Component Main Files Contract Repair Issue One-generation VST proof
> verif_do_generation.v The C function implements the generation-step relation after
> forward_remset , root forwarding, and scanning. Reorder the proof around the new call sequence without strengthening scanner preconditions. Collector-loop VST proof
> verif_garbage_collect.v The loop implements garbage_ collect_relation .Preserve remembered-set compatibility and invariants across collection and reset. Graph invariant library
> GCGraph.v ,spatial_gcgraph.v Backward edges are allowed only when represented in the remembered set. Replace global absence of backward edges with preservation of recorded backward edges. Mathematical theorem
> gc_correct.v garbage_collect_relation implies roots-level graph isomorphism. Use remembered-set entries as temporary roots while keeping the conclusion about ordinary roots. Specification boundary
> gc_spec.v and VST body lemmas VST preconditions justify the assumptions of the mathematical theorem. Use an explicit recorded-backward-edge invariant instead of the stale no_ backward_edge condition.

4 Workflow with Codex 

The Codex-assisted workflow was closer to supervised proof maintenance than to one-shot proof generation. The assistant was given access to the repository and was allowed to edit files and run targeted builds. We supplied the proof goal, design constraints, and course corrections. 

Proof-component ordering. The order of repair followed the proof architecture. The VST files first had to establish that the changed C collector still satisfied the abstract relations used by the mathematical proof. Only after verif_do_generation.v and verif_garbage_collect.v 

compiled, establishing that the C program correctly implements the functional model of the algorithm, was it productive to repair gc_correct.v , whose proof shows that the abstract algorithm preserves roots-level graph isomorphism. This avoided treating the final graph-isomorphism theorem as an isolated Rocq problem disconnected from the verified C program. 

Development loop. Most iterations followed a simple pattern. Codex inspected the current proof failure, searched for nearby lemmas, edited a focused region, and ran a targeted build such as: AI-Assisted Completion of CertiGC Proofs 7

> # rebuild definitions and proofs about the graph functional model make CertiGC/GCGraph.vo # rebuild proofs that the functional model preserves graph isomorphism make CertiGC/gc_correct.vo # rebuild proofs that the C program implements the functional model make CertiGC/verif_garbage_collect.vo

Full builds with make -j8 were used at integration points. The Rocq kernel was the primary feedback mechanism; Codex’s natural-language explanations were useful mainly when the failure indicated a mismatch between the intended invariant and the proof state. 

Proof-state access. In addition to shell builds, the session used a locally configured rocq-mcp Model Context Protocol server [LLM4Rocq 2026]. The server exposes Rocq compilation, environment queries, proof-state startup, tactic checking, multi-tactic probing, file outlines, and assumption queries as tools for LLM agents. In this project it was configured as a repository-local Codex MCP server using the same coqc binary as the VST build. Codex could therefore call tools such as rocq_start , rocq_check , rocq_step_multi , and rocq_query from the conversation: start a proof state at a theorem or error position, inspect the current goals, query the environment, try small tactic sequences, and then edit the tracked proof file or run a targeted build. This made proof-state feedback cheaper and more direct than reading compiler errors alone. The development did not include a controlled timing comparison, so this report does not claim a measured speedup. Qualitatively, however, MCP shortened local feedback loops by avoiding many edit-compile-read-error cycles for exploratory proof-state inspection. The workflow did not depend logically on MCP support: similar information can be recovered by compiling focused temporary files that replay a proof prefix while inserting Show commands, or by running targeted .vo builds and reading Rocq’s error messages. MCP was therefore an efficiency and ergonomics tool, not an assumption behind the proof result. 

Invariant proposal and adjudication. The recorded-backward-edge invariant was not fixed before the Codex session. In the interaction, Codex first formulated the need for a condition informally phrased as “no unrecorded backward edge” and later wrote the first Rocq definition of that predicate. We then recognized that the old no_backward_edge premise was semantically invalid for mutable GC and directed the repair to replace the old invariant rather than keep it as a convenient hidden assumption. This episode is representative of the collaboration: the assistant could propose a useful invariant, but we had to decide whether accepting it preserved the intended collector specification rather than merely making the scripts compile. 

Human constraints. Our guidance was deliberately conservative. New or changed lemmas were acceptable, but new or changed Definition s required discussion. Preconditions were not to be added to VST specs unless there was concrete evidence that the source program required them. This constraint appeared early in the scanner proof, where the question was whether the scanner specification really needed a positive available-space precondition after remembered-set forwarding. The accepted direction removed an overly strong condition; proposed additions such as extra pointer or heap predicates were rejected unless existing specifications justified them. 

Effective uses of Codex. Codex was effective at local proof repair and repeated invariant propa-gation. Once the recorded-backward-edge invariant and bridge shape were clear, many subgoals amounted to proving that a property was preserved by a fold over forward_remset_item , by heap updates, or by adding/resetting one generation. These tasks are tedious for a human but well suited to an agent that can search the development, try variants, and run the checker repeatedly. 8 Shengyi Wang 

Codex also helped with cleanup after the theorem was restored. The branch contains several later commits whose purpose was not to change the theorem but to remove stale proof artifacts, factor repeated preservation arguments, audit the theorem’s assumptions against VST specifica-tions, update deprecated names, and simplify helper lemmas. In a large proof development, this maintenance is not cosmetic: stale helper lemmas and stale assumptions obscure which invariants are actually needed and make future repair harder. 

Where human judgment remained central. The critical invariant choice was a proof-engineering decision rather than a tactic choice. The old proof failed because its semantic assumption was no longer true. Although Codex proposed the recorded-backward-edge formulation, accepting it as the replacement invariant required understanding the collector algorithm, the write barrier, and the desired external theorem. Codex could help explore consequences and fill in preservation lemmas, but the proof had to avoid shortcuts that would change the result. Two tempting shortcuts were to strengthen mathematical specifications with extra heap or remembered-set preconditions, or to expose remembered-set internals in the main theorem. Both changes would have altered the result being verified. The remembered set is private collector state; making it part of the theorem would change the public correctness claim. 

5 Results 

The branch reached a compiling state and was merged into the upstream live branch as pull request 30 with the merge message “Replace invalid no_backward_edge invariant for mutable GC” on May 3, 2026. The source repository is https://github.com/CertiGraph/CertiGraph; the proof artifact discussed here is pull request 30, whose merge commit is 85da48e4 .Table 2 summarizes repository evidence extracted from the git history. These numbers should be read as artifact statistics, not as a precise measure of human or AI labor. The git author field does not distinguish manual edits from Codex-assisted edits; the phase boundary below comes from the transcript-confirmed start of the Codex-assisted work and the corresponding commit dates. 

> Table 2. Repository evidence for the mutable-GC proof effort.

Interval Evidence Notes Nov. 2024–Mar. 26, 2026 23 git commits; +5316/-2113 human groundwork Apr. 22–May 3, 2026 51 git commits; +13340/-3557 Codex-assisted phase Nov. 2024–May 3, 2026 74 git commits; +17953/-4967 whole branch slice Table 3 summarizes the proof-component milestones of this phase. The key point is that the main mathematical theorem was not the last milestone. Rocq accepted its proof on April 29. The following days audited the connection between the VST specification and that theorem, removed the remaining obsolete invariant premise, and made the proof artifact more maintainable. The May 1 audit began by checking whether the collector specification’s preconditions were sufficient for the assumptions of the final isomorphism theorem. That check exposed the stale 

no_backward_edge premise path in the VST-facing proof. The obsolete condition was not confined to one local lemma: it flowed from the top-level collector condition into the loop invariant and then into the preconditions for each generation-collection step. In code, this path ran from garbage_ collect_condition through body_garbage_collect and gc_cond_implies_do_gen_cons to 

do_generation_condition obligations. In other words, commit statistics alone would have hidden a semantic repair inside what looked like routine proof maintenance. AI-Assisted Completion of CertiGC Proofs 9

Table 3. Milestone timeline of the Codex-assisted development phase.                               

> Date Proof Component Technical Issue Outcome Apr. 22–26 One-generation VST proof Repair verif_do_generation.v for the new
> forward_remset ;forward_roots ;do_scan sequence without adding unjustified scanner preconditions.
> 8fc20a3f :verif_do_ generation compiled. Apr. 26–27 Collector-loop VST proof Repair verif_garbage_collect.v ; preserve remembered-set compatibility across one-generation collection and reset; separate loop invariants from function-local specification requirements.
> 9a235844 :verif_garbage_ collect.v compiled. Apr. 28–29 Mathematical correctness proof Reconstruct gc_correct.v around no_unrecorded_ backward_edge , because mutable updates make the old no_backward_edge condition false.
> 94922344 : main theorem proof accepted by Rocq. May 1 Specification and premise audit Check whether the VST-facing garbage_collect_ spec premises justify the assumptions of the final theorem; remove the stale no_backward_edge
> condition from garbage_collect_condition .
> 51ca1b49 : remembered-set invariant carried explicitly through the VST specification. May 1–3 Cleanup and integration Factor reset preservation, consolidate remembered-set lemmas, simplify partial-graph and semi-isomorphism helpers, and rerun full builds after upstream updates. PR 30 prepared and merged into live .

This phase touched 18 CertiGC files. The largest proof changes were in GCGraph.v , which accumulated the remembered-set invariants and preservation facts, and gc_correct.v , which re-established the graph-isomorphism bridge. Most verification-facing edits were in two VST body proofs, verif_do_generation.v and verif_garbage_collect.v . The collector specification file, 

gc_spec.v , carried the corresponding premise changes. In addition to repository statistics, interaction statistics were extracted from the two Codex rollout transcripts corresponding to this work. These statistics are meaningful only when their categories are understood as nested rather than flat. Table 4 therefore separates additive tool-call counts from activity tags. The first tool-call block decomposes the total number of tool calls, while the activity tags describe overlapping properties of those same calls. The parser counts structured rollout items rather than streamed token deltas: user prompts are 

message items with role user , excluding automatic <environment_context> messages; tool calls are function_call , custom_tool_call , and web_search_call items; context compactions are top-level compacted records. Active time is computed by summing gaps of at most 30 minutes between recorded rollout events, following the same convention as the related CertiCoq experience report [Paraskevopoulou 2026]. The activity tags in Table 4 are not additional summands and are not mutually exclusive: for example, one shell make command can count as a shell command call, a shell build command, and a proof-checking invocation. Git counts are command invocations in the transcripts, not distinct repository commits, and apply-patch counts are patch tool invocations rather than semantically distinct edits. The two rollout files were selected because their substantive content was the CertiGC mutable-GC repair; no other project logs were included. Wall-clock time is reported as the sum of each active day’s first-to-last transcript span; the longer calendar span is included only to make clear that the transcript spans multiple calendar days. The statistics end at the mutable-collector cutoff date, May 3, 2026; later transcript entries about writing this report are excluded. These numbers characterize a supervised, checker-driven workflow. The 59.3 Codex active hours and 415 human prompts show sustained interaction rather than a single autonomous generation attempt. The large number of shell, search, read, and build commands reflects the main mode of work: Codex repeatedly navigated the existing repository, made small proof edits, and used the Rocq kernel to test whether each local repair matched the surrounding proof architecture. 10 Shengyi Wang 

Table 4. Transcript-derived Codex usage statistics. The first tool-call block is additive; activity tags are already included in the tool calls above and are not mutually exclusive. 

Metric Value 

Interaction records 

Human prompts 415 Context compactions 88 

Tool-call records 

Total tool calls 13,305 

Function tool calls 11,566 Shell command calls 8,077 Shell session inputs 1,368 Rocq MCP calls 2,096 Other function-tool calls 25 Apply-patch edit calls (custom tool calls) 1,731 Web search calls 8

Activity tags within the tool calls above 

Proof-checking invocations 2,131 Shell build commands 795 Shell search commands 2,018 Shell read/inspection commands 5,337 Git commit command invocations 80 

Time 

Calendar-span hours 265.9 Wall-clock hours, per-day sum 106.5 Codex active hours 59.3 The aggregate statistics hide an important distinction between theorem repair and post-theorem cleanup, so Table 5 breaks the same categories down by day. 

Table 5. Per-day Codex development activity. Tools is the total; Shell , Inputs , Rocq , and Edits are major subcounts, while Checks , Build , Search , Read , and Git are activity tags.                                                                                                                                                    

> Day Prompts Compact Tools Shell Inputs Rocq Checks Build Search Read Edits Git Wall(h) Active(h) Apr. 22 24 2539 384 74 20 67 60 111 210 54 45.7 2.9 Apr. 23 2052 32 118 17 111 20 100.8 0.8 Apr. 26 42 81,750 912 346 255 303 212 195 482 234 10 9.0 7.6 Apr. 27 58 15 2,499 1,326 417 503 474 168 342 878 250 20 14.1 10.1 Apr. 28 93 26 3,070 1,837 32 727 602 82 516 1,296 465 723.0 12.8 Apr. 29 62 23 2,705 1,657 118 546 402 29 440 1,215 381 11 21.4 10.8 Apr. 30 53 4759 536 129 461 57 102 311 82 911.6 4.9 May 1 43 61,031 686 211 0110 110 153 447 134 510.8 4.9 May 2 20 2487 401 212 60 52 79 262 72 65.3 2.1 May 3 18 2413 306 38 11 35 24 69 216 58 84.8 2.3 Total 415 88 13,305 8,077 1,368 2,096 2,131 795 2,018 5,337 1,731 80 106.5 59.3 AI-Assisted Completion of CertiGC Proofs 11

The daily breakdown makes the artifact story visible in the interaction data. The largest activity peak occurs on Apr. 28–29, with 5,775 tool calls and 1,273 Rocq MCP calls, matching the reconstruc-tion of gc_correct.v . The May 1–3 tail is smaller but still substantial: 81 prompts, 1,931 tool calls, and 19 git command invocations after the main theorem proof had already been accepted. This supports the claim that theorem acceptance was followed by substantive premise audit, cleanup, and integration work rather than by a final build alone. The transcript-derived file activity aligns with the git history. The files with the most patch calls were gc_correct.v (836), GCGraph.v (384), verif_garbage_collect.v (226), and verif_ do_generation.v (131). The most frequent targeted shell builds were verif_garbage_collect 

(208), GCGraph (163), verif_do_generation (122), and gc_correct (119). The proof artifact has four important final properties. The C collector calls forward_remset before root forwarding and scanning; the tracked proof sources no longer rely on the invalid no_backward_edge invariant; the VST-facing collector specification carries the recorded-backward-edge invariant explicitly while the ordinary graph/heap condition remains independent of remembered-set state; and garbage_ collect_isomorphism keeps the observable conclusion at ordinary roots-level graph isomorphism. Remembered-set assumptions remain proof-side obligations, not part of that observable theorem. 

6 Observations 

The theorem statement is the artifact to defend. In a large formal development, a compiling proof is necessary but not sufficient. In this case, that defense meant guarding against specification drift: strengthening preconditions until the proof became easier, or letting remembered-set details leak into a theorem whose purpose was to state graph preservation for ordinary roots. Definitions and preconditions are part of the scientific claim, not local proof conveniences; changing them required evidence that the collector semantics needed the change. Human review therefore focused on definitions, assumptions, and theorem statements. 

LLMs are useful for local invariant propagation. Once a good invariant is chosen, a large amount of proof work is mechanical but not trivial. The proof assistant requires exact lemmas about folds, list updates, graph validity, generation bounds, heap sizes, and compatibility predicates. Codex was useful because it could navigate the existing library and produce these bridge lemmas incrementally. The resulting proof still benefited from cleanup: some helper lemmas were introduced only to cross a local gap and became unnecessary after the proof architecture stabilized. 

Existing libraries are both leverage and constraint. VST and CertiGraph made the result possible because they already provided the semantic model, spatial graph representation, and verification discipline. They also constrained the shape of the repair. A small change to a definition could ripple through many files, and automation failures were often symptoms of larger mismatches between mathematical and spatial invariants. Codex was more effective when the development stayed within existing patterns than when it required new proof architecture. 

A failed invariant is a result. An important outcome of this phase was that the old no-backward-edge strategy was not a proof obligation waiting to be discharged. It was the wrong condition for mutable collection. Treating that failure as information changed the task from local script repair to invariant replacement. This is a useful distinction in LLM-assisted verification because an assistant can both propose a better invariant and make local progress under an overly strong assumption. Human review is needed to identify the path that preserves the intended theorem. 

A completed machine-checked proof is not the end of validation. The branch did not stop when Rocq first accepted the top-level theorem garbage_collect_isomorphism . The remaining question was whether the VST specification path justified exactly the assumptions of that theorem. The May 1 12 Shengyi Wang 

premise audit removed the obsolete no-backward-edge path from VST-facing conditions and made the recorded-backward-edge condition the explicit mutable-GC invariant. Subsequent cleanup factored repeated reset-preservation arguments, simplified helper lemmas, and updated deprecated Rocq names. In a mechanized development, this cleanup also exposes the proof’s real dependencies. 

7 Comparison with Related Accounts 

The closest inspiration is the CertiCoq report on machine-generated compiler proofs. That report [Paraskevopoulou 2026] describes using Claude Code to mechanize the ANF transformation cor-rectness proof. That work used the existing CPS proof as a template and reported approximately 7,800 lines of Rocq proof developed in about 96 hours. The human authors did not write proof scripts directly; they supplied high-level guidance and reviewed the result. The present experience is similar in three respects. First, both tasks are substantial mechanized proofs in established proof-assistant verification infrastructure. Second, both rely on the proof assistant as a machine checker, not on the language model’s self-assessment. Third, both show that an agent can make progress when it can repeatedly search a mature codebase, edit proof files, and invoke the checker in the same loop. The differences are more instructive. The ANF report is primarily an adaptation story: a closely related CPS proof supplied a proof architecture that Claude Code could adapt to ANF, although the new proof still required genuinely new reasoning. The mutable-CertiGC work is an invariant-repair and proof-maintenance story. Its nearby proof path was not a reusable architecture, because mutable updates made the central mathematical assumption false. The central problem was to choose a new invariant and thread it through existing VST, CertiGraph, and collector-correctness layers without weakening the final theorem. A second difference is that the first compiling version of the main theorem was not the endpoint. The post-theorem premise audit changed the VST-facing specification path by removing a stale immutable-collector assumption. That phase is less visible if one measures only theorem completion, but it was essential to making the final artifact match the mutable-collector semantics. This distinction affects how one should evaluate the assistant. When a related proof architecture is available, productivity can be measured by how quickly the assistant adapts it while filling in the genuinely new reasoning. For invariant repair, the main question is whether the assistant helps converge on the right architecture while preserving the semantic contract. In this case, Codex was more like a persistent proof maintenance collaborator than an autonomous prover. A contemporaneous non-archival report [Sergey 2026] describes an AI-assisted Lean mechaniza-tion of the Move borrow checker’s type soundness theorem. Although that work is PL metatheory rather than VST program verification, it reports a similar pattern: the assistant handled preservation cases, invariant propagation, and proof repair, while the human researcher supplied the decisive semantic structure. Together, these reports suggest that agentic assistants work best with a machine checker validating small edits and human review guarding semantic structure. 

8 Limitations and Validation 

This is a single-case experience report, not a controlled experiment. The work was performed on a branch that already contained substantial human design and proof effort. The repository history provides dates, commits, and diffs, but it does not by itself identify which lines were written manually and which were written with Codex. The quantitative transcript statistics reported above are retrospective, and the full rollout files contain private project discussion. They are therefore treated as local evidence rather than public replication artifacts. AI-Assisted Completion of CertiGC Proofs 13 

The strongest validation is machine checking. The relevant proof files compile, and the branch was merged upstream. Nevertheless, the checker validates only the statements that remain in the code. Human review is still required to judge whether those statements are the intended ones. The stale no_backward_edge assumption was not introduced during the Codex-assisted phase. It came from the earlier proof of the effectively immutable collector and became invalid only when mutable updates entered the collector model. This account also does not claim that Codex independently discovered the whole remembered-set proof architecture. Codex did propose the no_unrecorded_backward_edge formulation and wrote its first Rocq definition, but accepting that formulation as the replacement for no_backward_edge 

required our semantic review. Our role also included understanding the collector semantics, con-straining acceptable specification changes, and deciding when the proof had to reject an old assump-tion rather than preserve it. The more defensible claim is that an agentic assistant substantially helped turn that proof-engineering direction into a compiling, cleaned-up artifact. The interaction also exposed tooling limits. Codex mostly consumed the same textual build errors and proof states a human would see. More structured machine-readable feedback from Rocq and from VST proof obligations could make this style of repair less dependent on repeated shell builds and local search. The experience suggests that proof-assistant support for agentic tools should expose not only errors, but also obligation structure, dependency information, and stable references to nearby applicable lemmas. Full proof builds during the Codex-assisted development phase used make -j8 in the certigraph 

opam switch with Rocq 9.1.1, OCaml 4.14.3, CompCert 3.17, and VST 2.16. Because this report does not report wall-clock proof-build duration, it omits hardware-dependent build-time measurements. 

9 Conclusion 

The mutable-CertiGC branch shows a pragmatic mode of AI-assisted formal proof development. Codex did not replace the need for proof-engineering judgment, but it was useful once candidate invariants were judged against the collector semantics and we kept specification boundaries explicit. The resulting proof completes the mutable-collector story by replacing an invalid no-backward-edge assumption with the recorded-backward-edge invariant while preserving graph isomorphism over ordinary program roots rather than collector bookkeeping. The broader lesson is that agentic assistants can already help with large machine-checked developments when the collaboration is organized around the checker and around carefully guarded theorem statements. They are especially valuable for local repair, invariant propagation, and cleanup in mature codebases. The hard work remains deciding what should be true. 

Acknowledgments 

The author thanks Andrew Appel for suggesting this experience report and for discussions about CertiGC and AI-assisted proof development. The author also thanks Zoe Paraskevopoulou for making her related CertiCoq experience report available; its successful use of Claude Code directly motivated this agent-assisted CertiGC proof effort. 

References      

> Andrew W. Appel, Robert Dockins, Aquinas Hobor, Lennart Beringer, Josiah Dodds, Gordon Stewart, Sandrine Blazy, and Xavier Leroy. 2014. Program Logics for Certified Compilers . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom. doi:10.1017/CBO9781107256552 Richard Jones, Antony Hosking, and Eliot Moss. 2023. The Garbage Collection Handbook: The Art of Automatic Memory Management (2 ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL. Xavier Leroy. 2009. Formal Verification of a Realistic Compiler. Commun. ACM 52, 7 (2009), 107–115. doi:10.1145/1538788. 1538814

14 Shengyi Wang 

LLM4Rocq. 2026. rocq-mcp : MCP server for Rocq/Coq proof development. GitHub repository. https://github.com/ LLM4Rocq/rocq-mcp Accessed 2026-06-18. OpenAI. 2025. Introducing Codex. https://openai.com/index/introducing-codex/ Accessed 2026-05-07. OpenAI. 2026. Introducing the Codex App. https://openai.com/index/introducing-the-codex-app/ Accessed 2026-05-07. Zoe Paraskevopoulou. 2026. Machine-Generated, Machine-Checked Proofs for a Verified Compiler (Experience Report). arXiv:2602.20082 [cs.PL] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2602.20082 Ilya Sergey. 2026. Verifying Move Borrow Checker in Lean: An Experiment in AI-Assisted PL Metatheory. Proofs and Intuitions blog. https://proofsandintuitions.net/2026/03/18/move-borrow-checker-lean/ Accessed 2026-05-08. Shengyi Wang, Qinxiang Cao, Anshuman Mohan, and Aquinas Hobor. 2019. Certifying Graph-Manipulating C Programs via Localizations within Data Structures. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 3, OOPSLA, Article 171 (Oct. 2019), 30 pages. doi:10.1145/3360597 Shengyi Wang, Kathrin Stark, and Andrew W. Appel. 2026. Verification of a Generational Garbage Collector. (2026). Manuscript in preparation.