SIMT-Aware Lockstep Verification and
Functional-Coverage Closure Methodology for an
Open-Source RISC-V GPGPU: A UVM 1.2
Environment
Samuel Moussa∗, Steven Ibrahim∗, Ahmad Sudky∗,
Ahmad Fawzy∗, Abanoub Nabil∗, Alhassan Sayed∗,
Hossam Hassan†, and Hyung-Min Yoon‡
∗Department of Electronics and Communications Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering, Minia University, Egypt
†Independent Researcher, South Korea
‡Siliconarts, Inc., South Korea
Corresponding author: samuel.moussa@mu.edu.eg
Abstract—Open-source RISC-V GPGPUs such as Vortex ship
with directed-kernel regressions but no industrial-grade veri-
fication: no reference-model checking, no functional-coverage
model, and no sign-off discipline. This paper presents a complete
UVM 1.2 environment and methodology that closes that gap,
and reports what the resulting checking depth revealed about
both the RTL and its reference model. The environment wraps
a bus-master SIMT DUT with role-inverted agents, integrates
Vortex’s functional simulator (SimX) as a per-configuration
golden model over DPI-C, and renders verdicts through two
qualified checkers: a bidirectional end-state scoreboard and a
per-instruction, per-lane lockstep comparator governed by five
SIMT-specific alignment rules. A sound two-pass load-value
feed makes racy, fenceless multi-core programs instruction-
granularity verifiable (residual zero over 5,432 retirements), with
an explicitly characterized soundness boundary at asynchronous
interrupt timing. A three-layer coverage model adds, to our
knowledge, the first published SIMT functional-coverage layer
for RTL GPU verification—warp divergence depth crossed with
the immediate-post-dominator reconvergence stack, scratchpad
bank conflicts, and memory-coalescing classes—closing the en-
vironment’s own layers at 98.1% covergroup-bin / 94.7% total
on the primary configuration (the third-party ISA layer closes
separately at 83.1% bins / 89.3% weighted after register-index
exclusions), using only machine-generated, RTL-cited exclusions,
with a blocking waiver-integrity gate (the unintentional D-
extension elaboration at this configuration adds no functional
bins and only makes the code-coverage totals conservative;
Section XI). Every checker is proven able to fail by permanent
fault-injection guards. The flow surfaced real defects on both
sides of the comparison: an externally corroborated JALR LSB
ISA deviation, a non-scaling watchdog constant (independently
fixed upstream), an X-propagation window behind a reset relay
found by restoring a silenced assertion, a missing AXI error
path confirmed by fault injection, and a reference-model fetch
bug found by the lockstep itself. We position the work against
FuzzGPU (USENIX Security ’26), a concurrent RTL GPU fuzzer
on the same DUT: the two are complementary—bug discovery
by fuzzing versus coverage-quantified sign-off—and the JALR
deviation was found independently by both. All findings ship in
an evidence-cited register; every headline number in this paper
carries its provenance, and the boundaries of the method are
stated rather than waived.
Index Terms—UVM, RISC-V, GPGPU, SIMT, functional ver-
ification, lockstep co-simulation, functional coverage, coverage
closure, fault injection, open-source hardware
I. INTRODUCTION
Open-source silicon has an industrial verification problem.
The RISC-V ecosystem has produced mature, publicly docu-
mented verification assets for scalar cores—step-and-compare
lockstep environments, constrained-random instruction gen-
erators, ISA coverage libraries [4]–[7], [9]—but the most
complex open processor class, the GPGPU, has none of this.
Vortex, the leading open RISC-V GPGPU [1], [2], ships
with a directed-kernel regression and CI, no reference-model
checking at the RTL level, and no functional coverage model.
Every consumer of Vortex—research forks, GPGPU-PG stud-
ies, accelerator prototypes—inherits that gap. Concurrently,
FuzzGPU [3] demonstrated that attackers and fuzzers can find
real bugs in exactly this design space (20 previously unknown
bugs, 10 CVEs, across Vortex and Ventus), which converts
the verification gap from an academic inconvenience into an
exposure.
This paper presents a UVM 1.2 [10] environment and
methodology that closes that gap for Vortex, and reports what
the resulting checking depth revealed about both the RTL and
its reference model. Our contributions:
1) A complete, configurable UVM environment for a
SIMT GPGPU (Section III): role-inverted agents (DUT
= AXI master, agents = reactive slaves), a DPI-C–
integrated functional golden model rebuilt per config-
uration, a passive RVVI-style observability layer, and
a bidirectional end-state scoreboard—any clusters ×
cores × warps × threads topology from runtime options
(plusargs) with elaboration-time parameter self-checks.
2) Per-instruction
lockstep
for
SIMT
(Section
V):
five alignment rules—uuid-keyed program-order sorting,
arXiv:2609.13311v1  [cs.AR]  10 Sep 2026


mask-union record aggregation, per-lane compare scop-
ing, and volatile-CSR exclusion—that make CPU-style
lockstep sound for a SIMT machine, validated lane-
exact at five configurations (six programs) spanning a
2 × 2 × 3 × 2 axis space.
3) A
sound
two-pass
load-value
feed (Section VI)
that
makes
racy,
fenceless
multi-core
programs—
architecturally undefined and previously unverifiable—
instruction-granularity verifiable, with the residual as
the verdict and non-vacuity proven by injection; plus
a characterized soundness boundary at asynchronous
interrupt timing (Section XI).
4) A three-layer coverage model with honest closure
(Section VIII): a third-party ISA layer, an original SIMT-
microarchitecture layer—the first published functional-
coverage model of warp divergence depth, scratchpad
bank conflicts, and memory-coalescing classes for RTL
GPU verification—and a protocol/assertion layer; closed
at 98.1%/94.7% (covergroup bins/total) on the environ-
ment’s own microarchitecture and protocol layers—the
third-party ISA layer closes separately at 83.1% bins /
89.3% weighted after register-index exclusions—using
only machine-generated, per-configuration, RTL-cited
structural exclusions under a blocking waiver-integrity
gate, with unreachable-versus-unhit distinguished by ev-
idence and structural ceilings root-caused rather than
waived.
5) An evidence-classified findings register (Sections IX–
X): RTL bugs, hazards, and observability limits, and
reference-model defects—each with file:line evi-
dence and a disposition—including a reference-model
fetch bug found by the lockstep, demonstrating that a
lockstep flow verifies the golden model as much as the
DUT.
Section II positions the work against concurrent and prior
art; Section XI delimits the method’s own soundness bound-
ary; Section XII separates what front-end functional verifi-
cation can claim from everything silicon sign-off would still
require.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Vortex
Vortex [1], [2] is an open-source RISC-V GPGPU organized
as clusters →sockets →cores →warps →threads, with
per-core instruction/data caches, optional shared L2/L3, an
immediate-post-dominator (IPDOM) reconvergence stack for
divergence, and hardware barriers. Execution units comprise
ALU, FPU (FPnew), LSU, SFU (CSR/warp control), and a
tensor unit (TCU). The verified build is RV32IMAF at RTL pin
7a52ee5, primary configuration 1 cluster / 1 core / 4 warps /
4 threads (“1CL/1C/4W/4T”) with an AXI memory interface,
simulated on QuestaSim 2021.2 [23]. Notably, Vortex has no
trap architecture: there are no illegal-instruction, misaligned-
address, or CSR exceptions—a property with verification
consequences developed in Section IX.
B. Reference models
Vortex ships SimX, a functional (non-timing) simulator
maintained with the RTL. SimX’s emulator steps per instruc-
tion, returns a retirement trace with full SIMT architectural
state, and is decoupled from its timing model—structurally
an RVVI-shaped golden model [6]. Spike [8] cannot execute
the six SIMT instructions, so SimX is the primary golden
model and Spike serves as a secondary, independent base-
ISA cross-check. That audit has been carried out: on the
same linked ELF, Spike, SimX and the DUT retire exactly
11,076 architectural writebacks and agree on every program
counter, destination register and value—zero mismatches—
with non-vacuity proven by injecting a fault at one record and
confirming it is named. Its scope is bounded by construction
and we do not overstate it: Spike is a scalar ISS, so the audit
covers warp 0 / lane 0 base-ISA execution only and stops at the
first Vortex custom operation. The SIMT axis therefore has
no independent reference, and will not obtain one from this
direction. The consequence—that the primary golden model
is maintained by the same project and must itself be treated
as a verification target—is examined in Section X.
C. Lockstep and reference-model flows
Step-and-compare verification against a reference model is
the standard of care for RISC-V CPU cores: core-v-verif [5]
established the open-source pattern with ImperasDV [9] over
the RISC-V Verification Interface [6]; riscv-dv [7] sup-
plies constrained-random programs and a trace-compare co-
simulation flow; DiffTest [4] industrialized per-instruction
architectural-state comparison over DPI-C for the XiangShan
processor line. Industrial-scale UVM methodology on open
silicon is demonstrated by OpenTitan [22]. All of these target
scalar (or SIMD-vector) CPUs. Our environment descends
from this methodology family and extends it in three direc-
tions: to a bus-master DUT (role-inverted agents), to SIMT
semantics (per-lane masked compare, divergence, multi-record
retirements), and to weakly-ordered multi-core programs (the
two-pass load feed). Per-warp differential testing on this very
DUT has since also been demonstrated by FuzzGPU (below);
the lockstep layer presented here differs in its formalized
alignment rules, its UVM packaging, and its role as one of
several qualified checkers inside a sign-off flow rather than a
fuzzer’s oracle.
D. GPU verification and fuzzing
Software-level GPU kernel verification is a mature line:
GPUVerify [14] proves race- and divergence-freedom of Open-
CL/CUDA kernels; GKLEE [15] performs concolic testing and
explicitly targets divergent warps, non-coalesced accesses, and
shared memory bank conflicts as bug classes. These operate on
kernel source, not RTL; producer-consumer synchronization
has been verified in GPU programs [21], learned program
generation has precedent in compiler fuzzing [16], and for-
mal memory-consistency verification reaches the RTL level
in RTLCheck [19] and the PTX memory-model formaliza-
tion [20]. At the hardware level, FuzzGPU [3] (USENIX Secu-


rity 2026) is the first RTL GPU fuzzer: it generates valid SIMT
programs (divergence-aware generation stack, deadlock-free
barrier planner, interleaved warp generation with taint propa-
gation), runs them on Verilator [24] models of Vortex and Ven-
tus, and performs trace-driven differential testing against ISA-
level instruction-set simulators with per-warp state, reporting
20 previously unknown bugs and 10 CVEs. Its evaluation
is structural-coverage-based (line/toggle/expression), its cam-
paigns are time-boxed, and it carries no functional-coverage
model, no checker qualification, and no sign-off discipline—
by design, since it is a bug-discovery engine. Our work is
the complementary half of the problem: a UVM verification
methodology whose claims are coverage-quantified, whose
checkers are proven non-vacuous, and whose exclusions are
machine-generated and gate-checked. The two approaches also
cross-validate: the JALR LSB deviation we report as R1
(Section IX) was independently found by FuzzGPU (S2, up-
stream PR #339, CWE-682)—in the instruction-set-simulator
component of the same project; their RTL findings (X1–X3,
PRs #356/#358/#359) are disjoint from ours, consistent with
the different pins and oracles involved. Concurrent with both,
the Ventus project developed GVM, a UVM-like verification
framework for its own OpenGPGPU design; Vortex itself, to
our knowledge, has had no public UVM environment prior to
this work.
E. Checker qualification
Mutation-based
qualification
of
checkers—proving
a
checker can fail by corrupting the design or its inputs—is
established practice in CPU and SoC verification, both
academically [17] and commercially; NVBitFI [18] brought
systematic fault injection to GPUs for reliability studies.
This work applies the discipline end-to-end to a SIMT
lockstep flow: every verdict-rendering checker (Section IV) is
guarded by permanent fault-injection regression tests, and the
discipline is what allows the coverage and pass-rate numbers
of Section VIII to be taken at face value. Table I summarizes
the positioning of this work against the reference-model
verification and GPU testing flows.
III. VERIFICATION ENVIRONMENT
Fig. 1 shows the environment: active agents drive the launch
protocol and serve memory on the left, the functional reference
runs in lockstep on the right, and a passive probe layer feeds
the two checkers and coverage at the bottom.
A. Role-inverted agent architecture
A GPGPU DUT executes programs; it is not driven by
them. The environment therefore inverts the usual UVM roles.
Five agents surround the DUT: host and device-configuration-
register (DCR) agents (active) drive the launch protocol—
kernel base address, argument pointers, thread-count device-
configuration registers—through the platform’s control in-
terface; the AXI agent is an active responder, a reactive
slave backed by a memory model that services the DUT’s
fetch and data traffic; a memory agent covers the non-AXI
TABLE I
POSITIONING AGAINST REFERENCE-MODEL VERIFICATION AND GPU
TESTING FLOWS. “SIMT SEMANTICS” COVERS PER-LANE MASKED
COMPARE AND SPLIT-RETIRE AGGREGATION; “CHECKER QUALIFICATION”
MEANS FAULT-INJECTION GUARDS; “WAIVER DISCIPLINE” MEANS
MACHINE-GENERATED, GATE-CHECKED EXCLUSIONS. ISA COVERAGE
FOR OUR L1 LAYER IS PROVIDED BY THE THIRD-PARTY RISCVISACOV
LIBRARY; THE SIMT MICROARCHITECTURE MODEL IS THIS WORK’S
CONTRIBUTION.
Property
[5], [9]
[4]
[3]
This work
Verification target
scalar CPU scalar CPU
RTL GPGPU
RTL GPGPU
Per-instruction compare
✓
✓
✓
✓
SIMT semantics
—
—
partial
✓
Racy-program two-pass feed
—
—
—
✓
ISA functional coverage
✓
—
—
✓
SIMT coverage model
—
—
—
✓
Checker qualification
—
—
—
✓
Waiver discipline
—
—
—
✓
Verdict taxonomy
—
—
—
✓
Framing
sign-off
agile DV
bug discovery
sign-off
configuration of the same model; and a passive status agent
observes busy/completion state, the retired-instruction count,
and the program counter. A virtual sequencer coordinates
launch sequences. Stimulus is therefore a program (a compiled
ELF), and the UVM test class controls only how it is launched,
configured, and perturbed—tests and programs are orthogonal
and composed at the build level.
B. Golden-model integration
SimX
is
linked
into
the
simulation
via
DPI-C
(simx_init/load/dcr_write/run plus a per-retirement
record export). Both the RTL and SimX are rebuilt per
configuration so that DUT and reference always agree on
topology. Golden-model crashes are trapped by a signal
handler and mapped to a sentinel exit code, so a reference-
model failure is classified (Section IV) rather than crashing
the run or silently passing it.
C. Passive observability layer
All white-box visibility is bound, passive, and never a
checker:
• a
commit
probe
bound
to
the
retire
arbiter
of
every
core,
capturing
each
retirement
beat
{uuid, wid, PC, rd, wb, tmask, per-lane data}—where
uuid is the RTL’s unique per-instruction identifier, wid
the warp id, and tmask the active-thread mask—across
all clusters, sockets, cores, and issue lanes;
• an LSU writeback probe bound to the load-store slice,
capturing true per-lane load values after sign/zero exten-
sion (required because load data is not observable at the
commit arbiter, Section IX);
• an RVVI-style interface and UVM monitor [6] that pub-
lishes the merged retirement stream through an analysis
port;
• microarchitectural
probes
feeding
the
SIMT
cover-
age layer: scheduler, divergence/reconvergence, local-
memory bank, memory coalescer, cache-event, register-
hazard, and commit-beat probes (Section VIII).


Vortex GPGPU (DUT)
clusters →sockets →cores
warps × threads — AXI master
host agent (active)
DCR agent (active)
AXI agent
(reactive slave)
memory model
SimX functional
reference (DPI-C)
per-config co-build
Spike independent ISS
base-ISA audit (offline)
scalar: warp0/lane0
status agent
commit probe
LSU probe
RVVI monitor (analysis port)
functional
coverage
lockstep scoreboard
per-instruction, per-lane
end-state scoreboard
bidirectional, byte-exact
load/DCR/run
retirement
records
load-value feed (pass 2, §VI)
+LOCKSTEP_TRACE
(off by default)
Fig. 1. Environment architecture. Solid gray boxes are active UVM agents; dashed boxes are passive probes and offline tools (never checkers in the run);
dark boxes are the two verdict-rendering scoreboards and coverage. The DUT is the bus master; stimulus is a compiled program in the memory model. Two
references, with different roles: SimX is the primary golden model, stepped live over DPI-C, and models SIMT; Spike is a secondary, independent scalar ISS
used offline on an exported retirement trace to cross-check the base-ISA subset only (warp 0 / lane 0, stopping at the first custom op). SimX is co-designed
with the RTL and is therefore not independent; Spike is independent but cannot execute a SIMT kernel. Neither substitutes for the other, and the SIMT axis
has no independent reference (§XI).
Lockstep capture is plusarg-gated; with the gate off, runs are
proven byte-identical to the plain environment.
D. Checkers
Two independent checkers render verdicts:
1) Bidirectional end-state scoreboard. After completion,
every word the DUT wrote is compared byte-exact
against SimX (forward pass, up to 196,868 words in
one cache-tier test), and every word SimX wrote that
the DUT never wrote is checked (reverse pass, catch-
ing dropped stores). Sub-word stores are handled with
per-byte validity masking; IEEE-rounding-legitimate FP
differences are tolerance-compared (and bounded, Sec-
tion IX); read-only/GOT sections are excluded by re-
gion.
2) Lockstep scoreboard (Section V): every retired instruc-
tion compared per active SIMT lane.
A third, orthogonal gate makes the run verdict assertion-
aware: any RTL runtime assertion firing fails the run with a
distinct exit code, and failing runs are excluded from coverage
merging. A dedicated negative test (a deliberate misaligned
load whose value is discarded) keeps this gate honest: it must
fail through the assertion path alone while the scoreboards
pass.
E. Configurability with self-checks
One
compiled
environment
runs
any
topology
from
plusargs (+CLUSTERS/+CORES/+WARPS/+THREADS); inter-
face widths (e.g., the 50-bit memory tag) are derived from the
RTL package, and elaboration-time assertions compare every
UVM parameter against its DUT counterpart, failing loud
on mismatch. Validated topologies include 1CL/1C/4W/4T,
1CL/2C, 2CL/2C/4W/4T, 4C/2W, and 8C/8W/2T.
F. Protocol assertions
An AXI4 SVA layer [11] (∼15–18 protocol properties
plus 11 handshake-stability assertions) checks burst legal-
ity, outstanding-count consistency, and signal stability under
backpressure inline on the DUT’s AXI interface; slave-side
throttle (ready wait-states) and flood (back-to-back R beats)
stress modes—plusarg-gated and proven byte-identical when
off—exercise the stability properties. An error-injection mode
(+AXI_INJECT_ERR) drives SLVERR/DECERR responses
on the read channel; its findings are reported as R9/OBS-057
in Section IX.
IV. VERDICTS AND NON-VACUITY
Every run renders one of four verdicts: PASS, FAIL, UNVER-
IFIABLE, or (for lockstep runs) END-STATE-VERIFIED with
an instruction-granularity residual. UNVERIFIABLE is first-
class: a run where the golden model cannot render a verdict
(e.g., a reference-model abort) is classified with root-cause
evidence—never force-compared, never silently dropped, and
never counted as a pass.
Verdicts are only as good as their ability to go red. The
environment therefore carries permanent fault-injection guards
as regression tests, one per checker:
• wrong-value injection (+INJECT_FAULT): one bit of
one DUT store is flipped; the end-state scoreboard must
catch it;


DUT retirement stream
0x5c mul
0x59
lw
0x5a add
retire order̸ = program order; one load
splits into 0xd/0xe records sharing a
uuid; load data stale at the commit arbiter
SimX stream (DPI-C)
0x59
0x5a
0x5c
strict program order; uuid always
0; one record per instruction
Alignment engine — five rules
1 sort DUT records per (core, warp) by uuid
2 key both streams by per-(core, warp) program order
3 aggregate same-uuid records with thread-mask union
4 loads: LSU-probe values + verifiable-region filter
5 exclude machine-performance-counter CSR data
Per-lane compare: PC · rd · value, active lanes only →matched / field
mismatch / data mismatch / orphan, plus drain-empty on both sides
Fig. 2.
The lockstep alignment pipeline. The DUT stream (left) carries
the SIMT quirks that a scalar-CPU RVVI flow never meets; the reference
stream (right) is strictly ordered. Each rule removes exactly one class of
false mismatch: sorting fixes out-of-order retirements (Rule 1), program-order
keying bridges the reference’s null uuids (Rule 2), mask-union aggregation
reassembles split loads (Rule 3), the LSU probe with region filter restores
sound load comparison (Rule 4), and volatile-CSR exclusion removes timing-
only divergences (Rule 5). After alignment, any remaining difference outside
the three declared exception classes is a real defect.
• dropped-store injection (+DROP_STORE): one DUT
store is suppressed; the reverse scoreboard pass must
catch it (both guards historically detect at the exact
address 0x800075d8);
• lockstep injection (+LOCKSTEP_INJECT): one bit of
one retirement is flipped; the lockstep comparator must
catch it at the exact uuid/PC/lane;
• DCR RAL injection (+DCR_RAL_INJECT): a register-
abstraction-layer mirror corruption must be caught by the
register checker.
All guards must stay red on injection after any checker
change—a discipline directly in the tradition of mutation-
based checker qualification [17], applied end-to-end here to
a SIMT lockstep flow. During the work, a nearly-accepted
vacuous gate pass (negative tests reporting PASS when their
injection plusargs were absent) was caught and codified into
the rule: always verify the injection message, never the verdict.
This discipline, rather than any single checker, is what allows
the coverage and pass-rate numbers below to be taken at face
value.
V. PER-INSTRUCTION LOCKSTEP FOR SIMT
A. Architecture
The DUT-side probe stream and the SimX per-retirement
stream meet in a lockstep scoreboard that aligns both streams
per (core, warp) and compares each retirement per active
SIMT lane: PC, destination register, and written value, with a
four-way outcome taxonomy (matched / field mismatch / data
mismatch / orphan) and drain-empty checks on both sides so
that dropped or extra retirements are caught (Fig. 2).
B. Five SIMT-specific alignment rules
A scalar-CPU RVVI flow never meets the following; each
rule was forced by simulation evidence and is, we believe,
transferable to any SIMT lockstep implementation.
1) Retire order is not program order: Within one warp, the
commit arbiter retires whichever execution unit is ready first
(VX_commit.sv:56-71); an earlier-issued instruction was
observed retiring after two later ones. The functional model
retires in strict program order. Rule: align by the per-warp
issue counter (uuid), sorted—never by position or cycle.
2) The golden model’s uuid is not a cross-key: SimX
leaves its retirement uuid at zero (Section X), so DUT and
reference uuids cannot be matched directly. Rule: the align-
ment key is per-(core, warp) program order; the DUT uuid’s
high bits—which encode (CORE ID ≪NW BITS) + wid
(VX_uuid_gen.sv:40)—supply the (core, warp) attribu-
tion with no RTL change.
3) One instruction is not one retirement record: A single
load can appear as several commit records sharing one uuid
with partial, overlapping thread masks (observed: masks 0xd
then 0xe), because the LSU commits lanes as their memory
responses arrive—distinct from clean SIMD-beat splitting.
Rule: aggregate DUT records by uuid with thread-mask union
before comparing; never aggregate by start/end-of-packet
flags.
4) Load data needs its own tap and its own soundness
filter: The commit arbiter’s data field is stale for loads (the
LSU writes the register file on its asynchronous response
path). A dedicated LSU writeback probe recovers true per-lane
values—but a naive compare is unsound: loads of uninitialized
stack or local memory legitimately differ between models (429
false mismatches on a known-good kernel). Rule: compare
a load lane only when the reference-model effective address
lies in the verifiable data region and the golden value is not
the initialization poison; defer everything else to the end-state
check. With this filter the load compare is exact and on by
default (74 in-region lanes compared, 113 filtered, 0 false
mismatches on the reference kernel).
5) Performance-counter CSRs are model-divergent by def-
inition:
mcycle/minstret/mhpmcounter*
differ
be-
tween a timing-accurate DUT and a functional model (ob-
served off-by-one). Rule: the golden model flags the machine-
performance-monitor CSR range as volatile and the compara-
tor excludes their data (PC and destination still checked)—the
standard RVVI exclusion class.
Beyond the five rules, the comparator declares three
bounded, logged exception classes: the load-value deferral of
Rule 4, the volatile-CSR exclusion of Rule 5, and an fsqrt-only
tolerance. The DUT’s fsqrt.s is one ULP off correctly-
rounded IEEE 754 (Section IX), so an fsqrt writeback is
tolerated iff the two values are same-sign, finite, and within
one ULP (fp32_within_ulp, keyed on an is_fsqrt
flag exported by the reference); every toleranced comparison
is tallied (n_fp_ulp_tol)—logged, never silent. All other
floating-point operations compare bit-exact, and an fsqrt
beyond one ULP, or a NaN/Inf mismatch, still fails. A
two-pass reconvergence feed (armed with the load feed on
+LOCKSTEP_LOADFEED) then forces the accepted DUT
square-root result into the reference’s FP register file (re-
NaN-boxed for the FLEN=32 build) and re-checks every


TABLE II
LOCKSTEP CONFIGURATION MATRIX (ALL LANE-EXACT: 0 MISMATCHES,
0 ORPHANS). TALLIES ARE RECORDED IN THE COMMITTED VERIFICATION
DOCUMENTS; PER-RUN RAW LOGS WERE NOT RETAINED.
Configuration
Matched writebacks
1CL/1C/4W/4T (vector-add kernel)
1,035 / 1,035
1CL/1C/4W/4T (nested divergence)
2,668 / 2,668
1CL/2C/4W/4T
1,801 / 1,801
2CL/2C/4W/4T
3,333 / 3,333
1CL/1C/2W/2T
855 / 855
1CL/1C/8W/4T
1,423 / 1,423
downstream operation bit-exactly, so the accepted deviation
cannot cascade into false errors; fpu_test and fpu_mt
verify to residual zero under this handling (1,675 matched
retirements; four sqrt reconvergences in the multi-threaded
case). Each rule also carries a DUT precondition an adopter
must re-derive: Rule 1 a unique per-warp issue counter that
does not wrap within a run; Rule 2 a stable (core, warp)
attribution key; Rule 3 records that may split per lane but
share an identifier; Rule 4 a tap where true load values are
observable; Rule 5 knowledge of the model-divergent CSR
ranges.
C. Cross-configuration validation
The lockstep was validated lane-exact—zero mismatches,
zero orphans—across a configuration matrix spanning NCL ∈
{1, 2}, NC ∈{1, 2}, NW ∈{2, 4, 8}, NT ∈{2, 4} (Table II),
including a nested-divergence kernel (asymmetric 3v1 →
2v1 →1v1 splits) that exercised the mask-union aggregation
through divergence and reconvergence with no comparator
changes.
VI. VERIFYING RACY PROGRAMS: THE TWO-PASS
LOAD-VALUE FEED
Fenceless multi-core programs have no architecturally de-
fined result on a weakly coherent machine, so a per-instruction
comparison against a functional model diverges legitimately:
the two models resolve the same race differently. Rather than
waive such programs, we make them verifiable (Fig. 3). A first
pass records the DUT’s per-lane loaded values at the racy load
sites, keyed by (core, warp, PC, occurrence); a second pass
re-runs the reference following those values, so the models
share the race outcome and any remaining difference is a real
defect. This is a load-value feed in the RVVI sense, and it is
not suppression: a residual not explained by a fed load stays
a hard error.
On the flagship case—20 racy loads cascading into 138 di-
vergent retirements at first pass—the residual collapses to zero
over 5,432 retirements (5,314 matched, 118 data mismatches
at pass one; 5,432/5,432 matched at pass two), upgrading the
verdict from “UNVERIFIABLE” to verified modulo the fed race
resolutions. The feed’s soundness rests on an assumption we
state rather than discharge in general: that a divergent in-region
load is a genuine race resolution, not a DUT load-data defect.
For the flagship case the assumption was confirmed by trace
Pass 1 — live lockstep
20 racy loads →138 cascaded divergent retirements
(5,314 matched, 118 data mismatches, of 5,432)
Feed: (core, warp, PC, occurrence)
7→DUT loaded value
racy loads only; every other retirement stays hard-compared
Pass 2 — reference replay follows the feed
residual 0 over 5,432/5,432 retirements
Soundness boundary: interrupt timing collapses 116 →7, not 0
keying-independent: the models take interrupts at different instruction boundaries
Fig. 3. The two-pass load-value feed on the flagship fenceless two-core case.
Pass 1 runs the live lockstep and records the DUT’s resolution of every racy
load, keyed by (core, warp, PC, occurrence) so that replays with different
instruction interleavings still address the same load site. Pass 2 re-executes
the reference model while feeding it those values, so both models share each
race outcome and the residual becomes the verdict: zero mismatches over
all 5,432 retirements. Feeding is not suppression—a difference not explained
by a fed load remains a hard error. Asynchronous interrupts sit outside the
fixed point: the residual there is proven keying-independent and is reported
as classified, not forced green.
analysis—the first-divergence load reads a word still holding
its pristine ELF initialization value (nothing had overwritten
it before the DUT’s read) in a single-hart program running
on four shared-memory cores, a genuine cross-core ordering
race. The boundary is precise and we state it rather than hide
it: for an interrupt test the same feed collapses 116 divergences
to 7 but not to 0, because the two models take the interrupt
at different instruction boundaries, so a same-PC occurrence
count itself diverges. Re-keying the feed proved this is not an
alignment artifact—the residual is identical. Interrupt-timing
divergence therefore remains instruction-granularity unverifi-
able, while the end-state comparison still passes.
VII. STIMULUS
Directed
kernels (∼30, all compiled with the Vor-
tex toolchain, all byte-exact against the reference): arith-
metic and memory baselines; all 13 FPU operation classes;
tensor-unit WMMA including multi-warp collective launches;
nested-divergence
towers;
barriers
under
partial
thread
masks; wspawn/tmc sweeps; cache miss-status-holding-
register (MSHR) and memory-pressure stress; a 232 KB-text
kernel; a 256 KB high-entropy store stress; division corner
cases; CSR writes under SIMT masks; and VOTE/SHFL
operations.
Constrained-random: a riscv-dv [7] pipeline targeting
rv32im, with GPU-specific post-processing (machine-mode
CSR stripping, ecall→ebreak) and end-state verification;
Twelve riscv-dv profiles were brought up; two are excluded
as unimplementable on this DUT—unaligned-load/store (no
misaligned support, Section IX) and illegal-instruction (no trap
architecture)—and one was later dropped as a byte-identical
duplicate of another profile, leaving nine generator profiles
(twelve seeded instances run in the suite). Jump-stream gener-
ation is sanitized to keep the generator’s deliberate JALR-LSB


probing away from an RTL deviation it would otherwise trip
(finding R1); the deviation itself is reported, not hidden.
SIMT-aware generation (simtgen): an original random
C-kernel generator targeting the microarchitectural axes that
scalar generators cannot reach. Its knobs are derived from
the DUT’s own configuration space (warp/thread counts,
LSU coalescer window, local-memory bank count, IPDOM
stack depth), informed by the generation-axis taxonomy
published by FuzzGPU [3] but implemented against our
own checking stack; no FuzzGPU code is used (an eval-
uation of reuse, rejected for engineering reasons, is doc-
umented in the artifact). simtgen implements four axes:
divergence (structured branch trees with controlled split
depths and asymmetric masks), memory (stride/scatter/bank-
hostile access patterns), barrier topology (single-warp barri-
ers, deadlock-safe by construction; wspawn is deliberately
never emitted—it is a runtime-only bootstrap primitive with
its own structural waiver), and VOTE/SHFL (all eight in-
trinsics per program). The barrier and VOTE/SHFL axes
closed no new coverage—their targets (cp_vote_shfl_op
8/8, cross_sfu_threads) were already fully covered
by dedicated directed kernels (vote_shfl, bar_masks,
sfu_masks); their contribution is generator completeness
and seed-diversity robustness evidence, the same category of
result as the seed farm below. simtgen’s measured effect is
quantified in Section VIII; a ten-seed sweep across all nine
riscv-dv profiles (90 additional distinct programs, content-
hash verified, all passing) produced no measurable functional-
coverage gain (every category bit-identical except toggle at
+0.06%)—a robustness result we report as such, not as
coverage progress: coverage saturates inside the stimulus’s
reachable region, and the remaining work is stimulus of a
different kind, not more samples of the same kind.
Protocol stress: the AXI throttle, flood, and error-injection
modes of Section III, plus host/DCR launch-space sweeps.
VIII. COVERAGE METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
A. A three-layer coverage model
The functional model is organized in three layers with
different owners and deliberately different blind spots, and
their databases are never merged:
1) L1 — ISA coverage (third-party riscvISACOV layer):
80 active covergroups over RV32I/F/M/Zicsr/Zifencei.
Sampling every active lane as a hart (4,581 samples)
was proven to cover exactly the same bin set as lane-
0-only sampling (1,677 samples) on our kernels—an
empirical demonstration that ISA coverage is blind to
the SIMT axis, which is why L2 exists. A closed gap-
hunt (frozen 2026-09-06) leaves 78/80 covergroups real
and 429/516 target bins hit (83.14%; 89.28% weighted)
after register-index exclusions; two covergroups are per-
manently empty by construction.
2) L2
—
SIMT
microarchitecture (ours; the layer
this paper contributes): probe-sampled covergroups for
warp divergence crossed with IPDOM stack depth
(divergence_cg), reconvergence, barrier scope and
events, tmc/wspawn behavior, scratchpad bank con-
flicts (lmem_bank_cg), memory-coalescing classes
(coalesce_cg), cache events, register hazards, and
commit-beat shapes (beat_cg), alongside instruction-
class groups per execution unit.
3) L3 — system and protocol (ours): SVA assertion and
directive coverage, AXI transaction space, DCR/host
launch spaces, and system-state crosses.
B. Closure discipline
Three rules govern closure. (1) Exclusions are struc-
tural, RTL-cited, and machine-generated: a per-configuration
generator emits every waiver with a file:line cita-
tion (e.g., a write-response stability assertion is unreachable
because the adapter hardwires m_axi_bready = 1’b1,
VX_axi_adapter.sv:313), and a blocking hits-invariant
merge gate verifies that every waived bin had zero hits in the
unwaived bank—on its first execution this gate caught two real
waiver defects, one of which had been active for weeks. Exclu-
sions are keyed to the configuration—e.g., the global-barrier
path is excluded only at single-core, where it is structurally
unreachable, and kept at ≥2 cores. (2) Reachable-but-unhit is
left red: bins that stimulus could reach but did not are reported
uncovered, never waived. (3) Ceilings are root-caused: the tog-
gle plateau was traced, per sub-module, to a read-only icache
data port (51,340 bins, 55.7% sub-module toggle; 22,730
bins missing—26.4% of the entire toggle gap—traceable
to VX_socket.sv:106 tying .WRITE_ENABLE(0)) and
constant high address bits; an adversarial maximum-entropy
kernel moved aggregate toggle by +0.02%, establishing the
ceiling as structural. Coverage banks are reported per con-
figuration: merging coverage databases across topologies was
shown to be invalid (instance-set inflation deflates by-instance
percentages).
C. Results
Table III summarizes the banked configurations. All totals
are stated with their provenance and labels:
D. SIMT-layer closures and the generator’s measured effect
The
SIMT
layer
is
where
the
generator
paid.
Before
simtgen,
three
coverage
targets
were
believed
open:
the
depth-4
IPDOM
divergence
bin
(divergence_cg.cp_split_depth,
3/4—depth
3
never hit by any of 50 seeds), the bank-conflict bin
of
lmem_bank_cg.cp_bank_conflict
(0/3,
never
sampled in 70,498+ cycles), and the coalescing classes of
coalesce_cg.cp_coalesce_kind. Deliberate simtgen
programs closed the first two (Fig. 4): structured divergence
towers hit depth 4 (4/4), and bank-hostile access patterns
(all lanes of a warp addressing one bank by construction)
surfaced real conflicts; both closures are folded into a suite
bank (2026-09-09). Three honesty notes are attached to this
result and travel with it wherever it is cited:


TABLE III
COVERAGE BANKS (QUESTASIM; PER-CONFIGURATION, NEVER
BLENDED). ALL ROWS ARE THE 2026-08-16 pre-relay-fix BANKS; THE
RESET-FIXED 1CL BANK (51 RUNS, 2026-08-18) TOTALS THE SAME
94.7% WITH BRANCH 94.53% AND TOGGLE 83.34%—INDICATIVE ONLY,
TWO VARIABLES CHANGED (§VIII-E). A RELAY-FIXED 2CL BANK TAKEN
AFTER THIS TABLE WAS FROZEN (110 RUNS, 0 FAILURES, 93.4%
COVERGROUP BINS / 94.3% TOTAL, ON THE GROWN POST-REMEDIATION
COVERAGE MODEL) RESTORES CROSS-CONFIGURATION COMPARABILITY;
THE PRE-FIX COLUMNS ARE RETAINED FOR PROVENANCE.
Metric
1CL/1C/4W/4T
2CL/2C/4W/4T
Covergroup bins (raw)
370/377 = 98.1%
989/1032 = 95.8%
Covergroup (weighted)
99.8%
99.5%
Statement
98.1%
98.3%
Branch
95.1%
95.7%
Condition
90.4%
88.8%
Toggle
82.8%
80.5%
Assertion
96.9%
98.9%
Directive
100.0%
100.0%
Total
94.7%
94.6%
Runs passing
50/50‡
50/50
Coverage instances
2 256
8 275
‡ Simulation runs, not programs: 49 distinct programs, one run twice
under two bus modes.
A third bank with shared L2/L3 enabled totals 93.2% (51 runs, all
passing), also on the pre-fix design.
• the bank-conflict bin’s initial “gap” was in fact a
coverage-model defect (OBS-060): the coverpoint had
been defined over accepted requests, but the local-
memory crossbar admits exactly one winner per bank
per cycle—“two accepted requests on one bank in one
cycle” was structurally impossible, and deliberate bank-
hostile stimulus proved it by producing zero conflicts.
Reclassifying the coverpoint onto offered requests made
the bin reachable and simultaneously honest (169 conflict
hits, 61 no-conflict, 70,460 idle); the closure credit is
therefore shared between the probe fix and the generator.
A coverage definition must itself be validated against the
RTL’s structure; the stimulus gap and the taxonomy defect
were disentangled by experiment.
• the coalescing classes, which an earlier isolated-merge
report attributed to simtgen, were re-examined and found
already covered by the existing coalescer probe and
kernels before simtgen existed—an attribution correction
we report rather than quietly keep.
• the barrier and VOTE/SHFL generator axes closed noth-
ing because their targets were already fully covered by
directed kernels (Section VII); their value is generator
completeness and seed-diversity robustness. The marginal
picture per generator kind: ninety additional riscv-dv
programs closed zero bins (the seed-farm result), while 57
simtgen programs (divergence and memory axes) closed
the divergence and bank-conflict targets—stimulus kind,
not volume, moves this coverage model.
bins hit (%)
0
25
50
75
100
3/4
4/4
0/3
3/3
cp_split_depth
(IPDOM divergence)
cp_bank_conflict
(scratchpad banks)
before
after simtgen
Fig. 4. Effect of axis-directed generation on the two SIMT targets it genuinely
closed (bins hit, as a percentage of the coverpoint’s bin count). Before
simtgen (light bars): depth-4 IPDOM divergence was unreachable by any
of 50 random-program seeds (3/4 bins); bank conflicts never occurred in
70,498+ sampled cycles (0/3—itself root-caused to a coverpoint-definition
defect, since the crossbar admits one winner per bank per cycle). Deliberate
divergence-tower and bank-hostile kernels (dark bars) closed both to 100%,
now folded into a suite bank (2026-09-09). A third target previously reported
here (coalescing classes) was re-examined and found already covered by the
existing coalescer probe and kernels before simtgen existed—an attribution
correction to our earlier isolated-merge reporting.
E. Provenance of the design under verification
The design is an open-source register-transfer model pinned
at a specific revision, with eighteen locally modified files in the
synthesizable register-transfer tree (support and co-simulation
glue outside that tree is additionally modified, and the en-
vironment itself is new code). Most changes are simulator-
compatibility fixes made during bring-up. We disclose this
because a verification result is a statement about a specific
artifact, and “upstream, unmodified” would not describe what
we ran.
One of those modifications turned out to matter, and its
history is instructive. A library counter shipped with two
assertions checking for overflow and underflow. They fired
during bring-up and were guarded off—rewritten to skip
whenever their inputs were unknown—so that the environ-
ment could run at all. That guard remained for months. On
restoring the original assertion and root-causing why it fired,
we found a genuine defect (R10, Section IX-A). We replaced
the relay with an asynchronous-assert, synchronous-deassert
synchronizer; the counter assertions then pass with no guard
at all—twelve firings become zero—and the local modification
to that counter was retired in favor of the unmodified upstream
file.
Two consequences deserve emphasis. First, the assertion
had been correct: what was silenced was a real property of the
design, not a testbench nuisance, and the cost was months of an
unobserved unknown-value window. Second, fixing the defect
reduced a coverage number: branch coverage fell from
95.1% to 94.5% because modules behind a relay had been
executing their normal-operation paths during the unknown-
reset cycle, and those executions were counted as covered
branches. We report the lower figure as the correct one. (Two
variables changed between those measurements, so the delta
is indicative rather than isolated.)


TABLE IV
RTL FINDINGS (SUMMARY). THE R1 SPEC DEVIATION WAS
INDEPENDENTLY FOUND BY FUZZGPU [3] IN THE ISS COMPONENT (S2,
PR #339); THEIR RTL FINDINGS (X1–X3) ARE DISJOINT FROM OURS; R2
WAS INDEPENDENTLY FIXED UPSTREAM.
ID
Finding
Class
Disposition
R1
JALR target LSB not cleared; odd
PC propagates via AUIPC
Bug (ISA)
needs RTL fix;
stimulus sani-
tized
R2
STALL_TIMEOUT uses 1**N ≡
1; watchdog never scales
Bug (latent)
fixed;
independently
fixed upstream
R3
Misaligned
access:
no
trap;
silently retargeted/torn
Hazard
expected
per
SW
contract;
gated
R4
Core self-starts from reset; DCRs
have no reset value
Hazard
worked
around
(reset
handshake)
R5
Per-warp out-of-order commit
Quirk
handled
(§V-B)
R6
One load →multiple commit
records, overlapping masks
Quirk
handled
(§V-B)
R7
uuid encodes flat core id + warp
id
Quirk
exploited
(§V-B)
R8
Load data not observable at com-
mit arbiter
Observability
closed
(LSU
probe)
R9
Write path fire-and-forget; no AXI
error path
Characteristic
cited;
fault-
injected (166)
R10
Reset relay: reset registered in an
unreset flop; one-cycle X window
Bug (X source)
fixed; still up-
stream
IX. FINDINGS I: RTL OBSERVATIONS
Every finding is maintained in an evidence-cited register
shipped with the work (one entry per finding: what was seen,
file:line and/or run evidence, classification, disposition).
Table IV summarizes the RTL findings as R1–R10; two
are developed below, and further verified defects are noted
afterwards.
A. An unknown reset for one cycle, found by restoring a
silenced assertion (R10)
The design distributes reset through a relay module. That
module registers the incoming reset in a flip-flop which has
no initial value and which nothing resets:
‘PRESERVE_NET reg [R-1:0] reset_r;
// no initial value
always @(posedge clk) begin
reset_r[i] <= reset;
// nothing resets THIS
flop
end
assign reset_o[i] = reset_r[i / F];
Its output is therefore unknown from time zero until the first
clock edge (Fig. 5), so every module instantiated behind a relay
observes an unknown reset for one cycle. A reset-conditional
in such a module takes its non-reset branch—if (X) is not
true—so logic intended to be held in reset executes, and any
assertion inside that
branch evaluates on unknown operands.
The path to it is the point. A library counter in the
same design ships with assertions checking for overflow and
underflow. Those assertions fired during bring-up, at 5, 15 and
25 ns, on the instruction- and data-cache miss-status counters.
They were guarded off—rewritten to skip whenever their
inputs were unknown—so that the environment could run, and
cycle 0: X window
clk
reset
X
reset_r
X
reset_o
runs (else branch)
held in reset
consumers
reset_o
after fix
Fig. 5. The reset-relay defect (R10) as a timing picture. The relay registers
reset in a flip-flop that has no initial value and that nothing resets, so until
the first clock edge (shaded cycle 0) its output—and therefore the reset of
every module behind the relay—is unknown (X). Because if (X) takes the
else branch, reset-conditioned consumer logic executes its normal-operation
paths during that window, and assertions evaluate on unknown operands: this
is exactly what the (guarded-off) counter assertions had been reporting. With
the async-assert/sync-deassert fix (bottom trace), reset_o asserts with reset
from time zero and the twelve counter-assertion firings become zero—using
the unmodified upstream file.
the guard stayed for months. Restoring the original assertion
and asking why it fired produced the diagnosis above. The
assertion had been correct the entire time: it was reporting
a real property of the design, and what had been suppressed
was the report, not the problem.
We
replaced
the
relay
with
an
asynchronous-assert,
synchronous-deassert synchronizer, so that the relay output
asserts whenever reset asserts regardless of flip-flop state. The
counter assertions then pass with no guard at all—twelve
firings become zero—and the local modification to the counter
was retired in favor of the unmodified upstream file. A fifty-
one-run regression passes with the assertions armed, and the
fault-injection guards were re-confirmed to fail on injection.
The defect is present in the current upstream release.
Two observations generalize beyond this design. First, a
checker disabled to make a bench run is a checker whose
findings are lost, and the loss is silent and open-ended: here
it was months, and the affected surface was every module
behind a relay, not merely the one that happened to carry
an assertion. Second, fixing the defect reduced a coverage
number (Section VIII-E): no coverage metric can report that
some of its own coverage came from a state that cannot
legitimately arise.
B. JALR does not clear the target LSB (R1)
The RISC-V specification [12] requires JALR to clear
the least-significant bit of the computed target. Vortex omits
the clear (VX_alu_int.sv:222: the branch destination
is the raw rs1+imm), and—having no trap architecture—
cannot raise the instruction-address-misaligned exception the
specification prescribes for a misaligned target on a non-
compressed core. In the debug build (PC_BITS = XLEN,
identity PC conversion) the odd bit survives as the architec-
tural PC. Fetch silently word-aligns (VX_fetch.sv:101),
so execution continues on correct instruction words—but the


skewed PC does reach architectural results: every auipc/la
computes rd = PC + imm and inherits the skew, link-
register writes accumulate it across chained jumps (observed
+1 →+3), and downstream loads/stores go misaligned,
cascading into R3. The trigger is spec-legal stimulus: riscv-
dv deliberately sets the JALR base LSB expecting the archi-
tectural clear, so roughly half of generated jumps derail—in
a 12-profile suite, every profile fired misaligned-access asser-
tions (30–7,616 per run). In the release build (PC_BITS =
XLEN$-$2) a +1 target is masked away by representation—
spec-correct by accident—while a +2 target would silently
word-align where the specification demands a trap. The fix
is a one-line \&\,\˜{}1 at the destination adder; because
the reference model deliberately mirrors the no-clear behavior,
the fix must un-mirror both models together. FuzzGPU [3]
found the same deviation independently from a fuzzing flow
entirely different from ours (S2, upstream PR #339, CWE-
682—filed against the project’s instruction-set simulator; their
RTL findings X1–X3, at a different pin, are disjoint from
ours)—independent corroboration of the deviation, though not
of its RTL embodiment.
C. Further verified defects
fsqrt.s is one ULP off correctly-rounded IEEE 754 [13]
(OBS-014):
a
lockstep
lane-0
data
mismatch
(DUT
0x3fef7750
vs.
the
SoftFloat-derived
reference
0x3fef7751) localized by instruction and lane to the
square-root unit; the adjacent fdiv.s compared exact. The
end-state scoreboard’s FP tolerance absorbs one ULP by
design—only the per-instruction comparison surfaces it. A
second watchdog defect (OBS-017): beside R2’s macro bug,
the memory scheduler’s timeout localparam is denominated in
simulation-time picoseconds, yielding a ∼1,000-cycle budget
on our timescale and flooding L2/L3-enabled runs with 22,187
false-alarm messages while functionally clean (2,789/2,789
lockstep match). No AXI error path (OBS-057/R9): the
AXI adapter hard-asserts that responses are OKAY; injecting
SLVERR/DECERR on every seventh transaction produced
exactly 166/166 assertion firings and no recovery path—an
evidence-based upgrade of a waiver into a measured design
limitation, consistent with the missing trap architecture.
X. FINDINGS II: REFERENCE-MODEL OBSERVATIONS
A central lesson of this work: a lockstep flow verifies the
reference model as much as the DUT. SimX is maintained by
the same project as the RTL, so shared assumptions can hide
shared bugs; the per-instruction compare surfaced defects in
the model itself.
A. Misaligned instruction fetch, found by the lockstep itself
The reference read instructions at the exact byte program
counter. A computed indirect jump to an odd target—which the
RTL tolerates, because fetch word-aligns—made the reference
read across an instruction boundary and abort, classifying the
run unverifiable. The lockstep’s own divergence report local-
ized it. Word-aligning the fetch while leaving the architectural
PC odd (matching the DUT) recovered those runs. The obvious
alternative—masking the JALR target in the reference—was
tried and reverted with evidence: it produced 21,968 phantom
PC mismatches, because it fixed the model to the specification
rather than to the DUT. This is the clearest case for treating the
golden model as a verification target in its own right: the defect
was in the reference, and only a per-instruction comparison
could have attributed it there.
B. Abort surface and SIMT-divergent CSR semantics
SimX’s
unknown-input
behavior
is
to
abort—56
std::abort sites by disassembly (35 decode, 21 execute),
the majority reachable through the disassembly pretty-printer
rather than the decoder core: a run can be unverifiable
because the golden model could not name an instruction. The
lockstep upgrades such verdicts to “byte-exact for all 17,664
retirements before the abort.” Separately, a SIMT-divergent
CSR access produced 109 genuine data mismatches: the
reference serialized lane effects over the shared per-warp
fcsr while the RTL reads-broadcast and writes lane 0. The
reference was corrected to read-once/write-lowest-active-lane
semantics; the RTL quirk is deliberately not mirrored, and is
documented as a visible architectural choice.
XI. LIMITATIONS AND THE SOUNDNESS BOUNDARY
A. Asynchronous interrupt timing
The interrupt-random test at two clusters collapses from
116 cascaded divergences to 7 under the load feed—
and does not reach zero. The residual is proven keying-
independent: re-keying the feed from a per-warp ordinal to
(cid, wid, PC, occurrence) leaves it identical, disproving feed-
alignment artifacts. The cause is genuine: the timing-accurate
DUT and the functional model take asynchronous interrupts at
different instruction boundaries, so an interrupt-affected path
executes a different number of times; no load-data feeding
can align when an interrupt fires. The end-state compare
against the post-feed model passes, so the disposition is: end-
state VERIFIED, instruction-granularity residual classified—not
forced green. This defines the method’s soundness boundary:
two-pass trace replay is a fixed point for data-only divergence;
asynchronous-input timing requires a step-follower reference.
B. Control-flow-steering races
When racy loaded bytes steer control flow (a random jump
test), pass-2 replay walks a different path and meets fresh
racy loads the pass-1 trace never keyed (residual 15, thirteen
of them load-class; the post-feed end-state compare is clean).
Two-pass replay has no fixed point when races feed branches;
an iterated (bounded fixed-point) feed or a step-follower is
required. The verdict is left honestly red.
C. Structural blindness of differential testing
Differential testing is structurally blind to a fault in the
stimulus: DUT and reference execute the same binary, so
a mis-compiled kernel is mis-executed identically and every
checker passes while the kernel verifies nothing—observed


concretely when a tensor kernel’s compile-time geometry
silently mismatched the RTL configuration (OBS-028/OBS-
029). Equivalence validates only what differs between the
models; everything shared (binary, memory image, launch
geometry) requires independent assertions. We closed exactly
one such input (kernel geometry asserted at elaboration,
injection-proven) and report the class as open.
D. Other limitations
• Reference-model independence. SimX is not indepen-
dent of the DUT. The Spike audit covers the scalar subset
only (warp 0 / lane 0); the SIMT axis has no independent
reference, and this is a structural ceiling rather than an
unfinished task.
• Simulator dependence. All results are on one commer-
cial simulator (QuestaSim). Open-source simulation of
UVM has matured rapidly—recent Verilator elaborates
upstream UVM 2017 with constrained randomization—
but SystemVerilog functional coverage (covergroups) re-
mains unsupported there, so the coverage-driven half
of this methodology cannot yet run on an open-source
simulator; the lockstep and end-state checking halves are,
in principle, portable today.
• D-extension elaboration, scoped by inspection. The D
extension is elaborated at the primary configuration and
MISA reports D=1 (FLEN=64, confirmed by an elabo-
ration probe) although the toolchain builds RV32IMAF
and the reference model models F only—unintentional-
by-documentation as an RTL fact. Its coverage impact is
bounded by code inspection: the coverage model’s only
D-specific bin (float–double conversion) is config-aware-
excluded at RV32 (ignore\_bins keyed on XLEN),
the ISA layer compiles no D plan, and no stimulus can
emit a D operation—so no functional bin is diluted.
The elaborated-but-unexecuted D logic sits only in code-
coverage denominators, which makes the reported totals
conservative (they understate an F-only build), never
inflated.
• Per-mnemonic coverage soundness. The frozen banks
predate the discovery that several instruction-class encod-
ings alias (4’b1011 decodes as both a zero-conditional
op and EBREAK); per-mnemonic ALU identity in the
frozen bank is therefore unsound, and per-mnemonic
claims are drawn only from post-remediation measure-
ments.
• Structural coverage ceilings. Toggle coverage plateaus
for root-caused structural reasons; we report the true
value rather than gaming it.
• No trap architecture. Exception-path verification is
unimplementable on this DUT; the corresponding gener-
ator profiles are excluded as unimplementable rather than
skipped silently.
• Verified build. Findings are stated against the debug
build at one RTL pin; the release build changes the visi-
bility (not the presence) of finding R1. The configuration-
matrix tallies of Table II are documented results; their raw
per-run logs were not retained.
XII. TOWARD TAPE-OUT
The work reported here is front-end functional verification
of an RTL model. Silicon sign-off requires substantially more,
and the two categories below are deliberately separated be-
cause they demand different tooling, different skills, and—
critically—different claims. Neither list is a statement of
partial progress: every item is currently absent unless noted.
1) Remaining front-end (RTL functional) work: (1) Stimu-
lus diversity, not volume—the seed-farm negative result shows
coverage saturating inside the scalar generator’s reach; the
remaining work is stimulus of a different kind (privileged
behavior, exception stimulus, bus errors—partly delivered by
the error-injection mode—and the two unimplemented simt-
gen axes). (2) Error and exception verification beyond the
injection gate. (3) Formal property verification on arbitration-
heavy control (cache miss-status handling, commit arbitra-
tion), where dynamic simulation is weakest and state space
is small enough for proof; the IPDOM reconvergence stack
(push/pop balance, no underflow, reconvergence restores entry
mask) is the natural first target. (4) X-propagation and reset
randomization—R10 proves the bug class exists in this design,
and several unreset elements have been identified structurally
but never exercised under randomized reset. (5) Configuration-
matrix breadth beyond three sampled points. (6) Coverage-
model provenance: the L2/L3 layers are self-authored rather
than traced to a specification document, so closure measures
the model, not the specification. (7) An independent SIMT
reference—structurally absent, as above.
2) Back-end and ASIC sign-off (entirely out of scope):
Gate-level simulation with back-annotated timing; static tim-
ing analysis across PVT corners; DFT (scan, ATPG, MBIST);
CDC/RDC analysis with metastability modeling; lint and
structural sign-off; low-power verification; physical-design
closure; equivalence checking between RTL, netlist, and post-
layout; and a post-silicon path back into this regression. A
useful way to read the two lists: the front-end items would
raise the strength of the claims made in this paper, whereas
the back-end items are prerequisites for a different claim
entirely—that the design is manufacturable and will function
in silicon. Nothing in this work speaks to the latter.
XIII. CONCLUSION
We presented a UVM-based methodology that brings
reference-model verification—the standard of care for RISC-
V CPU cores—to a SIMT GPGPU, together with the first
published SIMT functional-coverage model for RTL GPU ver-
ification. The environment is complete and configurable: role-
inverted agents around a bus-master DUT, a per-configuration
co-built functional reference over DPI-C, a passive RVVI-style
observability layer, bidirectional end-state checking, and an
injection-proven non-vacuity discipline behind every verdict.
The lockstep layer contributes five SIMT alignment rules (each
with a stated DUT precondition) and a two-pass load-value


feed that turned an architecturally-undefined racy multi-core
program from unverifiable into verified modulo the fed race
resolutions (residual 0 over 5,432 retirements), while honestly
delimiting its own soundness boundary at asynchronous in-
terrupt timing. The closure methodology—machine-generated,
gate-checked exclusions, root-caused ceilings, residual bins
dispositioned rather than waived—carried the primary config-
uration to 98.1% covergroup bins / 94.7% total, and the SIMT
coverage layer was closed by an axis-directed generator (the
divergence and bank-conflict closures are folded into a suite
bank; the coalescing attribution and the coverage-model defect
found on the way are reported with their evidence).
The checking depth paid for itself in findings on both
sides of the comparison: in the RTL, a JALR ISA deviation
with architectural consequences (independently corroborated
by concurrent fuzzing work), a non-scaling watchdog macro
(independently fixed upstream), a silent misaligned-access
corruption mode, a missing AXI error path, and a reset-
relay X window found by restoring a silenced assertion; in
the reference model, a misaligned-fetch bug that had been
silently discarding verification results, found by the lockstep
itself. Both registers ship with the work, each entry evidence-
cited and dispositioned. We believe the methodology—and
its central lesson, that the reference model must be verified
alongside the DUT and the coverage model alongside both—
transfers directly to other open-source SIMT designs, and fills
the half of the open-GPU verification problem that fuzzing
does not address.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the Vortex research group at the Georgia
Institute of Technology for developing and openly maintaining
the GPGPU platform on which this work is built, and the
maintainers of the open verification assets (core-v-verif, riscv-
dv, RVVI, riscvISACOV, Spike) leveraged by the environment.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Tine, K. P. Yalamarthy, F. Elsabbagh, and H. Kim, “Vortex: Extending
the RISC-V ISA for GPGPU and 3D-graphics,” in Proc. 54th IEEE/ACM
Int. Symp. Microarchitecture (MICRO-54), 2021, pp. 754–766.
[2] F. Elsabbagh, B. Tine, P. Roshan, E. Lyons, E. Kim, D. E. Shim, L. Zhu,
S. K. Lim, and H. Kim, “Vortex: OpenCL compatible RISC-V GPGPU,”
in Workshop on Computer Architecture Research with RISC-V (CARRV),
2019.
[3] Z. Gao, J. Wang, Q. Zhou, L. Shan, J. Hu, X. Jia, and Z. Lv, “Fuzzing
open-source GPU hardware with SIMT program generation,” in Proc.
35th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security ’26), Baltimore,
MD, Aug. 2026, pp. 2465–2484.
[4] Y. Xu et al., “Towards developing high-performance RISC-V processors
using agile methodology,” in Proc. 55th IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microar-
chitecture (MICRO-55), 2022.
[5] OpenHW Group, “core-v-verif: functional verification project for the
CORE-V family of RISC-V cores,” [Online]. Available: https://github.
com/openhwgroup/core-v-verif
[6] OpenHW Group / Imperas, “RVVI: RISC-V Verification Interface,”
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/riscv-verification/RVVI
[7] CHIPS Alliance, “riscv-dv: SV/UVM based instruction generator for
RISC-V processor verification,” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
chipsalliance/riscv-dv
[8] RISC-V International, “Spike, the RISC-V ISA simulator,” [Online].
Available: https://github.com/riscv-software-src/riscv-isa-sim
[9] Imperas Software, “ImperasDV: processor verification IP with lock-step
compare,” [Online]. Available: https://imperas.com/imperasdv
[10] IEEE Standard for Universal Verification Methodology Language Ref-
erence Manual, IEEE Std 1800.2-2020, 2020.
[11] IEEE Standard for SystemVerilog—Unified Hardware Design, Specifica-
tion, and Verification Language, IEEE Std 1800-2017, 2017.
[12] A. Waterman and K. Asanovi´c, Eds., The RISC-V Instruction Set Man-
ual, Volume I: Unprivileged Architecture, RISC-V Foundation, 2019.
[13] IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic, IEEE Std 754-2019, 2019.
[14] A. Betts, N. Chong, A. F. Donaldson, S. Qadeer, and P. Thomson, “The
design and implementation of a verification technique for GPU kernels,”
ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 10:1–10:49, 2015.
[15] G. Li, P. Gopalakrishnan, I. Ghosh, S. P. Rajan, and G. Gopalakrishnan,
“GKLEE: Concolic verification and test generation for GPUs,” in
Proc. 17th ACM SIGPLAN Symp. Principles and Practice of Parallel
Programming (PPoPP), 2012, pp. 215–224.
[16] C. Cummins, P. Petoumenos, H. Leather et al., “Compiler fuzzing
through deep learning,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGSOFT Int. Symp. Soft-
ware Testing and Analysis (ISSTA), 2018, pp. 95–105.
[17] L. Di Guglielmo, F. Fummi, and G. Pravadelli, “Vacuity analysis
for property qualification by mutation of checkers,” in Proc. Design,
Automation & Test in Europe (DATE), 2010, pp. 262–267.
[18] T.-T. Tsai, S. K. S. Hari, M. Sullivan, O. Villa, M. B. Glick, and
S. W. Keckler, “NVBitFI: Dynamic fault injection methodology for GPU
applications,” in Proc. 51st Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable
Systems and Networks (DSN), 2021, pp. 64–76.
[19] Y. A. Manerkar, D. Lustig, M. Martonosi, and M. Pellauer, “RTLCheck:
A property checking approach for custom memory consistency models,”
in Proc. 50th IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchitecture (MICRO-50),
2017, pp. 713–725.
[20] D. Lustig, S. Sahasrabuddhe, and M. Giroux, “A formal analysis of the
NVIDIA PTX memory model,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS),
2019, pp. 253–266.
[21] T. L. Sharma, M. Bauer, and A. Aiken, “Verification of producer-
consumer synchronization in GPU programs,” in Proc. 36th ACM
SIGPLAN Conf. Programming Language Design and Implementation
(PLDI), 2015, pp. 88–98.
[22] lowRISC, “OpenTitan: open source silicon root of trust,” [Online].
Available: https://github.com/lowRISC/opentitan
[23] Siemens EDA, “QuestaSim,” [Online]. Available: https://eda.sw.siemens.
com/en-US/ic/questa/simulation/
[24] Verilator open-source project, [Online]. Available: https://www.verilator.
org
