Title: CertiFlash: A Formal Verification Framework for Flash Translation Layers in Computational Solid State Drives

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.10347v1

Published Time: Thu, 10 Sep 2026 01:19:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# CertiFlash: A Formal Verification Framework for Flash Translation Layers in Computational Solid State Drives 

## Harshita Gupta † Mayank Kabra † Rakesh Nadig † Nika Mansouri Ghiasi † Sahand Divsalar †

## Fatma Nisa Bostancı † Ataberk Olgun † Konstantinos Kanellopoulos † Jisung Park ‡

## Haiyu Mao § Abdullah Giray Yağlıkçı ¶ Mohammad Sadrosadati † Onur Mutlu ††ETH Zürich ‡POSTECH §King’s College London ¶CISPA 

In traditional compute-centric systems, many modern data-intensive applications suffer from significant data movement overhead because they move large amounts of data from stor-age to the compute unit. Storage-centric computing reduces this overhead by moving computation near or inside solid-state drives (SSDs). To enable it, SSD policies (e.g., address transla-tion, garbage collection, and data placement) require modifica-tion. These policies are part of the Flash Translation Layer (FTL), the SSD’s firmware. However, modifying them is complex and error-prone, and a single bug can violate the device’s correctness, isolation, and ownership guarantees. Even a functionally correct FTL can leak data between tenants sharing the device, drop in-tegrity tags, or assign a flash block to the wrong tenant. This is because FTL logic has direct access to many security-critical device components, e.g., the host-interface queue and the meta-data in internal DRAM. We show that a faulty FTL can corrupt the device state at five surfaces inside the SSD, and we demon-strate those failures on a DaisyPlus OpenSSD platform. Prior work verifies individual FTL designs, but faces two limitations. (1) These works establish only functional correctness, so a modi-fied FTL can violate isolation, integrity, and ownership and still pass verification, providing no security guarantee. (2) They are tied to the state and operations of a single FTL design, so every FTL modification requires regenerating every proof from scratch, significantly increasing the verification effort. We propose CertiFlash, a formal verification framework for FTLs, mechanized in the Rocq proof assistant, that gives de-signers a machine-checked proof of both security and correct-ness. CertiFlash models an FTL as a deterministic state ma-chine with a single global invariant over mapping, isolation, integrity, ownership, and allocation, grouped by primary pur-pose. We prove once, over a general FTL model, that (i) ev-ery FTL operation preserves the global invariant and (ii) the model refines an idealized block device. For a new design, a designer discharges five hypotheses about its own operations through a Rocq interface instead of redoing either proof. Across four case studies, a designer adds 27 to 3,231 lines against a 16,489-line framework, significantly reducing the verification effort. The source code of CertiFlash is freely available at: 

> https://github.com/CMU-SAFARI/CertiFlash

.

## 1. Introduction 

Modern data-intensive applications suffer from significant data movement overhead because they access large amounts of low-reuse data [1–50]. This data moves all the way from the solid-state drive (SSD) through main memory to the processing units for its first use, and is rarely used again. Many prior works (e.g., [6, 8, 19, 26, 29–33, 45, 48, 51–106]) demonstrate that moving computation near or inside the SSD [107–117] (§2.1.1), i.e., storage-centric computing , accel-erates data-intensive applications such as genome analyt-ics (e.g., [30–33, 106, 118]), machine learning (e.g., [85, 91, 96]), graph processing (e.g., [77, 92, 119, 120]), and database ana-lytics (e.g., [121–123]) by reducing data movement between storage, main memory, and processing units. Storage-centric computing [9, 14, 15, 124–126] requires cus-tomizing SSD policies (§2.1.2), e.g., logical-to-physical address translation or data placement, which are present in the Flash Translation Layer (FTL). The vendor modifies the FTL to build an application-specific SSD (§2.2.1), and the modified FTL runs on the SSD’s controller. Custom FTL logic has direct access to shared, security-critical device components, i.e., the host-interface queue, internal DRAM, the embedded compute units, the flash controller, and the NAND flash chips, which we treat as five failure surfaces (§4.1). These surfaces are commonly shared in a scenario where multiple tenants [127–135] share a common SSD. NVMe namespaces and per-namespace keys de-fine the isolation boundary among multiple tenants [136, 137], but the FTL enforces them and must implement them correctly. An FTL is complex, so modifying it correctly is error-prone for any FTL designer, i.e., the party that supplies or extends the FTL. Production-scale FTLs maintain many runtime data structures, e.g., a logical-to-physical (L2P) mapping table that maps host-supplied addresses to physical flash pages, free-block pools, write pointers, and (in modern designs) demand-cached translation pages [138] and per-tenant ownership meta-data. These structures are continuously updated, both by (i) host-visible read and write requests, and (ii) internal main-tenance operations such as garbage collection and wear lev-eling [139–146], which silently relocate live data and update persistent metadata without explicit host invocation. The risk is not limited to an FTL being functionally incorrect, but in a multi-tenant scenario, even a functionally correct FTL can expose one tenant’s data to another, drop an integrity tag the host relies on, or assign a flash block to the wrong tenant. We observe that a single bad state, e.g., a stale L2P entry, a duplicate in the free-block list, or an omitted integrity tag, can corrupt address translation, leak data across tenants, or 1arXiv:2609.10347v1 [cs.AR] 9 Sep 2026 invalidate data-integrity guarantees the host relies on. 

Real-System Attack Demonstration. We demonstrate these risks on a real SSD, the DaisyPlus OpenSSD [147], by modifying its FTL (§4.1.2). The attacks fall into two settings. First, in a single-tenant setting, a modified FTL can, e.g., corrupt the tenant’s own data, breaking data integrity. Second, in a 

multi-tenant setting, it can, e.g., expose one tenant’s data to another or assign a flash block to the wrong tenant, breaking tenant isolation and block ownership. Each attack modifies only the FTL and issues ordinary host I/O, with no privileged access. The corruption can persist silently in FTL metadata for many operations before any host-visible failure, so neither the host nor the victim observes the violation. Unverified FTL modifications therefore pose a fundamental security risk. 

Key Problem. Conventional SSD validation methods, such as unit testing, trace replay [139, 148], and fault injection [149] on emulated or prototyped devices [150–152], cover only part of the reachable FTL states, i.e., the combinations of values its internal data structures can hold, namely the logical-to-physical mapping table, the free-block and allocation lists, and the per-block valid-page and erase counts. Hence, these methods can miss faults that require specific sequences of host requests and maintenance transitions [149, 153]. Each customization changes which states the FTL can reach, so its validation cannot be reused and must be redone for the new de-sign. Formal verification closes testing’s coverage gap, because a proof holds over every reachable state. Prior work verifies FTLs formally in two ways. (1) SCFTL [153] and Flashix [154] each verify one specific FTL design. (2) Qiao et al. [155] instead build a framework that applies to any FTL and demonstrate it on BAST [156]. Unfortunately, these approaches have two lim-itations. (i) They establish only functional correctness. None of them states an isolation, integrity, or ownership property, so a functionally correct FTL passes while leaking data across tenants. (ii) Their proofs do not carry over to a new design. The invariant is supplied per design, so a new FTL writes its own and proves it. An effort that verifies every customization independently re-establishes every property of the unchanged parts, so its cost scales with the size of the FTL rather than with the size of the change. 

Our goal is to design a reusable formal verification frame-work that enables FTL designers to develop a machine-checked proof of the correctness and security of their customized FTL. To this end, we propose CertiFlash, a formal verification frame-work implemented in the Rocq proof assistant [157]. 

Key Mechanism. CertiFlash defines a general FTL model that captures what every FTL has in common, i.e., the address mapping, page states, ownership labels, free blocks it keeps, and the six operations it performs on them, i.e., read, write, invalidate, integrity-tag update, garbage collection, and wear leveling. CertiFlash proves the two properties, i.e., (1) invariant preservation and (2) refinement of the idealized block device, once over this model. CertiFlash provides two ways to establish these two properties for a given FTL. (i) Direct verification , in which the FTL designer writes their FTL as a Rocq model and proves end-to-end that the operations preserve all the required properties. CertiFlash carries out this mode once for its own model. A design repeats it only if it changes the global invariant. (ii) Modular verification , in which the designer describes their FTL through a Rocq interface and discharges five hypotheses instead of redoing the existing proofs. The interface asks for three inputs (§6.2): (a) the FTL’s state and operations; (b) a refinement map that projects the FTL’s state onto CertiFlash’s model; and (c) proofs of five hypotheses about the FTL’s own operations, namely that they preserve the global invariant and that a write neither loses nor corrupts data. CertiFlash’s proofs then carry over unchanged, so the designer proves only what the modification changes. 

Key Results. We evaluate CertiFlash on four case studies spanning the ways a new design can differ from a verified one (§7): an orthogonal extension, DFTL [138], the in-storage-processing system MegIS [33], and deduplication [158]. Across the four case studies, a designer adds 27 to 3,231 lines against a 16,489-line framework. 

Contributions. We make the following contributions: • We identify five failure surfaces that custom FTL logic can violate, and we demonstrate attacks on each surface, using a real SSD, the DaisyPlus OpenSSD platform [147] (§4.1.2). • We propose CertiFlash, the first framework that gives a mod-ified FTL a machine-checked proof of tenant isolation, data integrity, and block ownership, not only functional correct-ness. CertiFlash states mapping correctness, tenant isolation, data integrity, block ownership, and block allocation as a single global invariant (Definition 5.2) and proves that 1) every FTL operation, including garbage collection and wear leveling, preserves it (Theorem 5.1), and 2) reads return the data stored at the corresponding address in the idealized block device (Theorem 5.3). • We make verification reusable across FTL designs through two modes (§5): direct verification, in which a designer proves their implementation correct end-to-end, and mod-ular verification, in which a designer describes their FTL through a small Rocq interface and discharges five hypothe-ses instead of redoing CertiFlash’s proofs. To our knowledge, this is the first work to make FTL security proofs reusable across designs. • We evaluate CertiFlash on four case studies and show that verification effort is significantly reduced by CertiFlash’s modular verification. 

## 2. Background 

We describe (1) the solid-state drive (SSD) architecture, the Flash Translation Layer (FTL), and the NAND-flash hardware constraints (§2.1); (2) storage-centric computing, which drives FTL customization (§2.2); and (3) how prior storage-centric designs modify the FTL (§2.2.1). 

2.1. SSD Organization and FTL 

2.1.1. SSD Architecture. A modern SSD comprises five key components arranged along the path from host I/O to 2physical flash storage [127, 139, 148, 159] (as shown in Fig-ure 1). (i) The host-interface layer (HIL) 1 accepts incoming I/O requests over an industry-standard protocol (e.g., NVMe over PCIe [137, 160, 161]), enqueues them in its request queue for the SSD controller, and delivers completion responses to the host. (ii) The SSD controller 2 hosts embedded compute units 3 , i.e., CPU cores (e.g., [162]) or accelerator engines (e.g., [33, 139, 148, 162, 163]), that execute the SSD’s firmware, which includes the FTL (§2.1.2) 4 . (iii) The controller has direct access to an internal DRAM 5 that caches FTL metadata and recently-used data read from flash [139, 164]. (iv) The flash controller 6 translates the FTL’s logical operations into low-level NAND commands and issues them to the NAND flash chips [139, 165–175], and implements the error-mitigation mechanisms, e.g., ECC, refresh, and read-retry, that keep the flash reliable [165, 166, 168, 169, 176–179]. (v) The NAND flash chips 7 provide the physical storage and execute the read, program, and erase commands the flash controller is-sues [113, 172, 180–182] and transfer data through multiple par-allel channels. NAND flash imposes three constraints on these commands. First, reads and programs act on a page, commonly 16 KB [183–186]. Second, erases act on a whole block, a fixed group of consecutive pages [113, 165, 172, 175, 181]. Third, a programmed page cannot be programmed again until its block is erased. These constraints force the FTL to write out-of-place ,i.e., a write to a logical address whose previous mapping is still live takes a fresh page from a free-block pool and invalidates the previous one. The FTL manages this out-of-place write and the metadata it requires (§2.1.2). Each NAND page carries a small out-of-band (OOB) area next to its data [113], where the FTL stores the page’s metadata, which consists of (i) page state (erased, live, or stale), (ii) a reverse mapping , i.e., the logical address the page was written for, and (iii) an integrity tag that lets a later read check the page’s contents, which we model after the end-to-end protection information a drive already carries per logical block [187]. An FTL that keeps no in-DRAM reverse map reads this field during garbage collection, to learn the logical address of a live page before relocating it [138, 139]. SSD Host System  

> Host Interface Layer
> Request Queue
> I/O Request
> Write Buffer Mapping Table Cache Internal DRAM Flash Controller Flash Controller Flash Controller
> ….
> Flash Chip Flash Chip Flash Chip
> …
> Flash Chip Flash Chip Flash Chip
> …
> Flash Chip Flash Chip Flash Chip
> …
> SSD Controller
> Flash Translation Layer
> Garbage Collection Wear Leveling Cache Management Logical-to-Physical Address Mapping Bad Block Management
> Embedded Cores
> ….
> 1234567

Figure 1: Overview of a modern solid-state drive (SSD). 

2.1.2. Flash Translation Layer (FTL). The FTL [188–191] is the SSD control layer that enables the host to use NAND flash as a block device, hiding the three constraints above while sustaining the device’s performance, reliability, and lifetime. It comprises eight key components. 

(a) Logical-to-Physical (L2P) Mapping. The FTL maps each logical block address (LBA) from the host to a physical page number (PPN) in NAND flash [192]. Different FTL designs differ in granularity [138, 156, 193–195]: page-mapped FTLs use a single L2P table; hybrid-mapped FTLs (e.g., BAST [156], FAST [196]) combine a coarse Block Mapping Table (BMT) with a fine-grained Log Page Table (LPT) [138, 193]; and demand-cached FTLs (e.g., DFTL [138]) keep only a working set of L2P entries in DRAM, fetching the rest from on-flash translation pages on demand. A page-mapped table is the fastest to consult but too large to hold in DRAM at scale; hybrid mapping shrinks it at the cost of merge operations, and demand caching keeps DRAM small but requires a flash read on every miss. 

(b) Cache Management. The FTL caches L2P mappings and recently-used data in the SSD’s internal DRAM [139, 164, 197– 201], and buffers writes to reduce program/erase cycles and improve flash endurance. 

(c) Garbage Collection (GC). The FTL reclaims space by selecting blocks with few valid pages, migrating their live data to fresh blocks, and erasing the resulting old blocks [139– 144, 172, 190]. Erased blocks return to the free-block pool from which writes and relocations take fresh pages. GC runs without a host request and rewrites the L2P mapping and per-page metadata of every page it moves. 

(d) Wear Leveling (WL). The FTL balances erase wear across blocks by tracking per-block erase counts and redirecting fu-ture writes to less-used regions [145, 146, 188, 190]. Like GC, it relocates live data without a host request. 

(e) Crash Recovery. The FTL restores a consistent state after power loss through journaling and checkpointing [138, 153]. 

(f) Data Layout in Flash. The data layout defines how the FTL places host data across the NAND flash chips [113, 172, 180– 182], i.e., the channel, die, plane, block, and page each logical page is written to. It determines the parallelism the SSD can extract, the number of valid pages garbage collection must relocate, and which tenants’ data share a block. 

(g) DRAM Data Layout. The SSD’s internal DRAM holds the FTL’s metadata and a write buffer for host data [139, 164]. The DRAM data layout defines where each structure resides, i.e., the logical-to-physical (L2P) mapping table, the free-block and allocation lists, the per-block valid-page and erase counts, and the integrity tags. All tenants and all FTL modules share this single flat address space. 

(h) Flash Controller. The flash controller issues read, pro-gram, erase commands to the NAND flash chips and manages their timing, error-correcting code (ECC), and status handling. 

2.2. Storage-Centric Computing 

Storage-centric architectures [9, 14, 15, 35, 124–126] reduce data movement between the SSD and processing units via two approaches: (1) In-Storage Processing (ISP) (e.g., [8, 26, 29, 30, 33, 45, 48, 51–96, 202–204]), executing computation on the SSD’s embedded controller cores [8, 59, 66] or on ac-celerator units placed in or near the SSD (e.g., smart NICs, on-board FPGAs [26], or near-flash accelerators), leveraging the SSD’s internal bandwidth [112, 205–208] and DRAM as 3buffers to store intermediate data; and (2) In-Flash Processing 

(IFP) (e.g., [6, 19, 53, 75, 97–105]), leveraging the analog opera-tion of NAND flash arrays to perform computations inside the array. These architectures accelerate diverse applications, e.g., genomics [30–33, 118] and machine learning [85, 91, 96]. 

2.2.1. FTL Modifications in Prior Designs. Storage-centric computing requires modifications to the FTL, and prior designs have modified it extensively. We analyze 17 prior storage-centric designs, and Table 1 records the eight FTL dimen-sions (§2.1.2) that they modify. 

Table 1: FTL modifications in prior storage-centric designs.                                                                                                                                   

> Modifications to storage system Applications Prior Works (A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (F) (G) (H)
> Genome analytics MARS [118] ✓✗✓✓✗✓✓✓
> MegIS [33] ✓✗✓✓✗✓✓✓
> GenStore [30] ✓✗✓✓✗✓✓✓
> Graph-based applications GLIST [92] ✓✗✓✗✗✓✓✓
> GraphSSD [119] ✓✗✓✓✗✓✓✓
> SmartSAGE [77] ✗✗✗✗✗✓✓✓
> VStore [120] ✓✗✓✓✗✓✓✓
> Database analytics Dotori [121] AnyKey [122] ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> Crail-KV [123] Machine learning REIS [91] ✓✗✓✗✓✓✓
> CambriconLLM [96] ✗✗✗✗✗✓✓✓
> OptimStore [85] ✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓
> Bulk-bitwise operations CIPHERMATCH [53] ✓✗✗✓✓✓
> Ares-Flash [97] ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> Flash-Cosmos [6] ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> ParaBit [19] ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
> ✓= explicitly modified; = potentially required; ✗= not modified. (A) logical-to-physical mappings, (B) cache management, (C) garbage collection, (D) wear leveling, (E) crash recovery, (F) data layout in flash, (G) DRAM data layout, (H) flash controller.

• Genome analytics. These workloads stream large read sets sequentially and in parallel. Prior in-storage designs [30– 33, 106, 118] map data with coarse-grained sequential L2P entries (A), schedule garbage collection and wear leveling so that maintenance does not interrupt streaming (C, D), place data across flash planes and DRAM so that multi-plane reads can serve it (F, G), and extend the controller with commands that invoke the in-storage accelerator (H). • Graph and database analytics. These workloads issue ran-dom I/O with little spatial locality. Prior designs [77, 92, 119– 123] add graph-native or key-value mappings (A), relax wear leveling (D), make garbage collection exploit locality (C), co-locate related data (F), and extend controller scheduling and the I/O protocol (H). • Machine learning. These workloads demand high band-width and parallel access. Prior designs [85, 91, 96] coarsen L2P mappings to clusters or model weights (A), reconfigure the flash layout for parallel access (F), and extend controller command handling (H). • Bulk-bitwise operations. In-flash designs [6, 19, 53, 97] compute inside the NAND array. They require computation-aware mappings (A), operand-aligned layouts that mark com-pute regions (F), and custom flash commands (H), and several disable ECC or force SLC mode for precise array-level results. FTL customization is not limited to storage-centric computing. Open-channel SSDs [209, 210] move the FTL to the host, and ZNS SSDs [211] expose zones so that the host controls data placement and reclaim while the device keeps mapping within a zone, wear leveling, and ECC. Key-value SSDs [122, 212] accept variable-length keys instead of fixed-size logical block addresses, so their FTL indexes keys to physical pages instead of translating logical addresses. 

## 3. Threat Model 

We describe (1) the two settings we target, single-tenant and multi-tenant SSDs (§3.1); and (2) the scope of our model, i.e., which device functions we verify and which we hold fixed (§3.2). In both settings, we treat the FTL as untrusted. 

3.1. Target Settings 

3.1.1. Single-Tenant SSDs. A single tenant owns the entire SSD, and the FTL manages all physical blocks on its behalf. This is the setting of most storage-centric designs (e.g., [30, 33, 55, 77, 85, 91, 92, 96, 118–123, 213]), where a vendor customizes the FTL for one application and the device serves one workload at a time. The FTL is the only component that maintains mapping correctness, data integrity, and block allocation for that tenant, so an FTL fault can corrupt address translation, silently lose data, or invalidate the integrity guarantees the host relies on. 

3.1.2. Multi-Tenant SSDs. In commercial cloud systems, it is standard practice to share physical resources across tenants to improve utilization and cost efficiency (e.g., CPU cores among database tenants [214]). The same principle applies to SSDs (e.g., [132–135, 215–217]). Consolidation of multiple tenants onto a single high-capacity SSD avoids two costs. First, a drive dedicated to one tenant stays underutilized. Second, a database that several tenants share must be replicated on every drive. Recent ISP systems (e.g., [83, 204]) target the same multi-tenant setting. Tenants then share the SSD’s flash, internal DRAM, and FTL metadata. NVMe Namespaces, sets, and per-namespace media keys express the isolation boundary [136, 137, 218], but every one of them is enforced through the FTL. Any fault in the FTL implementation can therefore corrupt the mechanism every tenant’s isolation depends on. A multi-tenant FTL configuration consists of n tenants shar-ing one SSD, each tenant τi [128, 129, 219] owns a contiguous, non-empty range Ri ⊆ { 0, . . . , addr _space −1} of logical ad-dresses. A physical block becomes that tenant’s when the FTL programs one of the tenant’s addresses into it, and no block ever holds two tenants’ data. The SSD vendor supplies the FTL, which runs on the controller’s embedded cores; the ten-ants supply workloads, not code. The FTL has direct access to DRAM-resident metadata (mapping tables, per-page metadata, key tables) and can issue read, program, and erase commands to the flash controller. We treat the FTL as untrusted. Any mod-ification, whether faulty or malicious [220–222], may update the metadata and access the flash in any order, and tenants 4may issue any host I/O. Such an FTL aims to break a tenant’s isolation, corrupt or lose data, or return data the host never wrote. 

3.2. Scope of the Model 

CertiFlash verifies the FTL state and the operations that act on it. The FTL state is the value of every FTL-managed data structure, i.e., the address mapping, the flash pages and their per-page metadata, the ownership labels and the region table, the allocator state, and the encryption keys (§5.1). The model has six operations, i.e., host reads, writes, invalidations, writ-ing per-page integrity metadata, garbage collection, and wear leveling. These six operations are the model’s entire transition set, and every SSD policy a design changes, e.g., how a logical address maps to a physical page, which physical page a write uses, which block is reclaimed, and how wear is spread, is a choice made inside them. CertiFlash does not verify three things. First, whether our model matches a real FTL. Second, device management, e.g., creating, deleting, and resizing tenant namespaces [136, 137], sanitizing the device [223], and setting NAND timing. Certi-Flash holds these functions fixed and takes from them the re-gion table and the per-address ownership labels that say which addresses belong to which tenant. Third, the NAND flash itself. We assume ECC corrects read-disturb and retention errors, so a read returns the data that was written (e.g., [174–176, 179]). We do not model concurrency between FTL invocations, bad block retirement [175], or timing side channels [224, 225]. At most one FTL invocation runs at a time. 

## 4. Motivation and Our Goal 

We describe (1) the five failure surfaces at which an unverified FTL can break tenant isolation, data integrity, or block owner-ship, and the ten failures we demonstrate on a real SSD (§4.1); and (2) why prior FTL verification frameworks do not rule these failures out (§4.2). 

4.1. Failures of an Unverified FTL 

4.1.1. Failure Surfaces. A modified FTL runs on the controller with direct access to the five components of §2.1.1. Each is a failure surface , a component at which a faulty or malicious FTL action can break tenant isolation, data integrity, or block ownership. We name a surface by the part the FTL reaches through, e.g., the host-interface layer’s request queue, not by where the corrupted state ends up. The five surfaces expose ten failures, described below and proven reachable in §7.2. • HIL request queue (FS#1). Host commands reach the FTL through this queue. While serving a command, a modified FTL can erase (i) a block a tenant’s address still maps to, so the freed block is reallocated to a second tenant while the first still maps into it, or (ii) a block index outside the device, so a block that does not exist enters the free pool. • Internal DRAM (FS#2). The internal DRAM holds the FTL’s address mapping and per-page metadata. A modified FTL can (i) map two addresses to one physical page, so a read of one returns another tenant’s data, (ii) map two offsets of one address to one page, so two of that address’s own pages return the same data, or (iii) map an address to a page recorded under another namespace, so a read crosses the namespace boundary. • Embedded compute units (FS#3). The controller’s cores and accelerators run the FTL firmware and in-storage pro-grams. A modified accelerator routine can map one tenant’s address to a page (i) another tenant owns, so a read returns that tenant’s data, or (ii) recorded under another namespace, so a read crosses the namespace boundary. • Flash controller (FS#4). The flash controller turns the FTL’s operations into NAND commands. A modified FTL can program a page but omit its integrity tag, so no later read can verify the page’s data. • NAND flash chips (FS#5). The NAND chips execute the read, program, and erase commands, and raw access reaches them directly [170]. A modified FTL can (i) return to the free pool a block that is already there, so the pool holds it twice and hands it to two tenants, or (ii) program a page and map it to an address in another namespace, so a read crosses the namespace boundary. 

4.1.2. Demonstration on a Real SSD. We demonstrate all ten failures on a real SSD. In each, we modify the FTL firmware at the surface and run the FTL from an NVMe host. Six failures produce a host-visible effect: an NVMe read of the attacker’s own address returns another tenant’s data, which we confirm by comparing SHA-256 [226] digests. The other four corrupt FTL metadata that no NVMe read exposes, and we confirm each by the firmware’s boot-time self-test of the violated invariant clause. We present FS#2, the L2P aliasing, in detail. The others follow the same procedure. 

Setup. We use a DaisyPlus OpenSSD [147, 152] (Xilinx Zynq UltraScale+ ZU17EG, Micron NAND) running the OpenSSD reference FTL (gr3ftl), which manages the flash on the device and implements the NVMe controller in firmware. The board attaches to a Linux host over PCIe and enumerates as an ordi-nary NVMe SSD with 4 KiB logical blocks. The FTL maps in 16 KiB slices of four blocks. Tenants are logical-address ranges. The victim and the attacker are distinct logical slice addresses (LSAs), and we issue all I/O from the host with the standard  

> nvme

tool. 

L2P aliasing. The FTL’s mapping step is the concrete coun-terpart of the model’s L2P map: an LSA resolves to a virtual slice address (VSA) backed by a physical page. The aliasing failure is a remap of the attacker’s entry onto the victim’s,   

> victimVsa = L2P[VICTIM_LSA].vsa; /* 1024 */ L2P[ATTACKER_LSA].vsa = victimVsa; /* 2048 -> 1024’s slice */

so two logical slices resolve to one physical slice. A victim writes a secret to its slice. The attacker then issues an ordinary NVMe read of its own address. With the remap in place, the read returns the victim’s secret. The SHA-256 of the attacker read equals the victim’s and differs from an uninvolved control block,    

> victim read sha256 = 9436f68d..dcba control read sha256 = 07bdd78f..5abb attacker read sha256 = 9436f68d..dcba (= victim)

5a cross-tenant confidentiality breach carried entirely over the standard block interface, with no privileged access, firmware exploit, or side channel. Two lines in the FTL suffice. 

The Verification Problem. Each modification in Table 1 changes the states the FTL can reach at these surfaces. A custom FTL must therefore be proven, before deployment, to reach no failing state at any surface. Each new design changes the FTL again, so this proof is needed again. The verification problem is to produce it for every custom FTL at a cost proportional to what the design changes, not to the whole FTL. 

4.2. Limitations of Prior FTL Verification 

Prior work on the verification of FTLs and flash file systems almost entirely verifies against a functional specification, i.e., that the device behaves as an idealized disk or file system. We identify three key limitations of prior designs. 

Limitation 1: No security property is stated. Qiao et al. [155] define FTL correctness as refinement to a disk-like specification, SCFTL [153] verifies snapshot consistency, and Flashix [154] and Cogent [227] verify flash file systems against file-system specifications. None of them states tenant isolation, integrity-tag coverage, or block ownership. A modified FTL can therefore violate all three and still satisfy the specification these frameworks prove. Our real-system attacks make this concrete: five of the ten attacks in §4.1 change only ownership labels and integrity tags, which no functional specification constrains, so every framework above admits them. Tripathy et al. [228] do check security properties, but they model-check one ransomware-resistant FTL rather than state a contract that another FTL can satisfy. 

Limitation 2: Proofs are tied to one implementation. 

SCFTL [153] and Flashix [154] each verify a single fixed imple-mentation, and Flashix’s layered structure composes within a fixed FTL rather than across designs. Cogent [227] is a lan-guage and compiler, and its refinement proof relates C code to its own specification, so it transfers to no other FTL either. Qiao et al. build a framework in which an FTL refines a disk, and demonstrate it on the hybrid-mapped BAST FTL [156]. In their framework, the invariant is a parameter, so a newer FTL design must be verified from scratch, which significantly increases design effort. Their model also has only three op-erations, i.e., initialize, read, and write, so it covers neither garbage collection nor wear leveling. Hence, the verification effort is required again for every design change. 

Limitation 3: The verified designs predate storage-centric computing. The FTLs these frameworks verify, e.g., the hybrid-mapped BAST [156], requires only address-translation and maintenance state. A storage-centric FTL that can be used in multi-tenant scenarios also requires per-tenant ownership metadata, the range mappings its accelerators read (§2.2.1), and a custom FTL modifies exactly this state. No prior framework constrains it and only verifies a fixed set of FTL operations. A storage-centric design may also propose a new operation built on the NAND commands and metadata updates beneath it (§2.1.1). Verifying such a design therefore requires proofs at that lower level, which no prior framework provides. Hence, each existing FTL verification framework establishes functional correctness for one fixed, conventional FTL, and the one framework that checks security properties does so for a single design. A storage-centric FTL needs isolation, integrity, and ownership guarantees that survive modification. A verification framework for modified FTLs must fix these guarantees once, as a contract, so that a new design inherits them instead of re-proving them. 

Our goal is to design a reusable formal verification frame-work that enables FTL designers to develop a machine-checked proof of the correctness and security of their customized FTL. 

## 5. CertiFlash: Formal Verification Framework 

We propose CertiFlash, a formal verification framework imple-mented in the Rocq proof assistant [157]. CertiFlash proves two properties of a designer’s FTL. (1) The FTL preserves a

global invariant , i.e., a conjunction of multiple correctness and security properties over the FTL’s state that every operation must keep true. (2) The FTL refines an idealized block device, i.e., every read the host issues returns the data a simple, cor-rect block device would return, so its host-visible behavior is indistinguishable from that of the idealized device. CertiFlash reasons about an FTL at two levels. First, at the operation level, the six operations of the FTL model (§5.1) are the unit of proof. CertiFlash proves once, for its own model, that each operation preserves the global invariant and that the model refines an idealized block device (§5.2, §5.3). Second, at the command level, each operation expands into the commands the device executes (§5.1.4), which carries the guarantee down to what an FTL issues directly, not only to an FTL that acts through the six operations. A designer reaches these guarantees by direct or by modular verification, which §6 describes. All proofs are mechanized in Rocq [157, 229, 230]. We define the FTL failure as follows. 

Definition 5.1 (FTL failure) . An FTL exhibits a failure if, start-ing from a well-formed state, i.e., one that satisfies the global invariant, it can reach a state in which the global invariant (stated in §5.2, Definition 5.2) is false. The failure surfaces of §4.1 are the components at which an FTL introduces such a state. 

5.1. The FTL Model 

We first specify the host-visible behavior of an idealized block device (§5.1.1). We then model the FTL as a deterministic state machine (Q, Σ, δ, q 0). Each state in Q is an FTLState record that captures the FTL’s address mapping, per-page metadata, ownership labels, allocator state, and encryption keys (§5.1.2, Table 2). Σ contains the operations that the FTL serves (§5.1.3), 

δ defines their transitions, and q0 is a well-formed initial state. Each operation expands into a sequence of lower-level com-mands, which we explain in §5.1.4. 

5.1.1. Abstract Specification. S is the set of abstract device states. A state h ∈ S is a partial map (Addr (a) × Page (p)) ⇀

Data (d) that assigns data to a (logical address, page offset) 6pair. write (a, p, d ) updates h(a, p ) with data d, read (a, p ) re-turns it, and invalidate (a, p ) makes h(a, p ) undefined. The specification captures only host-visible functional behavior. It abstracts away the tasks managed by FTL, such as tenant ownership, physical layout, out-of-place writes, and free-block management. 

5.1.2. Concrete State. q0 is a freshly formatted device after vendor setup has installed the address labels (§3.2), with no page mapped. Throughout the paper, T ? denotes an optional 

T , and all index types are natural numbers. The 16 fields of 

FTLState (Table 2) fall into five groups. 1

Table 2: The 16 fields of FTLState , grouped by role.                                                   

> Group Field Type Mapping l2p_map Addr ×Page →PhysAddr ?
> Flash pages
> page_state Block ×Page →PageState
> page_role Block ×Page →Role ?
> page_meta Block ×Page →PageMeta
> Ownership
> addr_tenant ,addr_namespace Addr →TenantId ?/NamespaceId ?
> block_tenant ,block_namespace Block →TenantId ?/NamespaceId ?
> region_table N→RegionMeta ?
> Allocation
> free_block_list list Block
> free_block Block →bool
> wear_count Block →N
> open_block TenantId ×NamespaceId →Block ?
> write_ptr TenantId ×NamespaceId →Page
> block_open Block →bool
> Crypto key_table KeyId →KeyMeta ?

• Mapping. l2p _map is the L2P mapping table. It sends each 

logical page , a host address with a page offset, to its own physical page, so the pages of one address may sit in different blocks. • Flash pages. page _state marks each cell erased (PS _Empty ), stale ( PS _Invalid ), or live ( PS _Valid (d)). 

page _role separates user data ( RData ) from FTL metadata (RMeta ). page _meta models the page’s out-of-band area (§2.1.2). It holds the owner tenant, the owner namespace, an optional integrity tag, and the reverse mapping, i.e., the logical page stamped into the page when it was programmed. • Ownership. addr _tenant and addr _namespace label each logical address with its owning tenant and namespace, and region _table records each region’s tenant, names-pace, and address range. Vendor namespace setup installs all three (§3.2), and no operation in the model changes them. 

block _tenant and block _namespace carry the same two labels at block granularity. The FTL copies them from the address when it allocates a block to that address, and clears them when it erases the block. The model carries both gran-ularities because the host names addresses while the device’s access-control hardware sees blocks. • Allocation. free _block _list is a stack of erased blocks. An erase pushes a block onto it, and a write or relocation takes its destination block from the head. free _block is a per-block flag for the same pool, which lets a check test one block without scanning the list. Every operation that allocates or frees a block updates both. wear _count records how many times each block has been erased, and every erase increments it. open _block names the block each tenant and 

> 1

These 16 fields are a base. Richer designs route additional fields through the CUSTOM _FTL interface (§6.2). 

namespace is currently filling, and write _ptr points to the next free page in it. block _open marks which blocks are open for writing. • Crypto. key _table holds device-global encryption-key metadata and lies outside any tenant’s view. 

5.1.3. Operation Semantics. CertiFlash defines six op-erations, four host-visible requests ( COpRead , COpWrite ,

COpInvalidate , COpSetTag ) and two maintenance transi-tions ( COpGC , COpWearLevel ). They are exactly the FTL’s responsibilities under §3.2, i.e., the data path (read, write, inval-idate), integrity metadata (SetTag), and wear maintenance (GC, wear leveling). The transition function is step : FTLState →

COp → option FTLState , which returns Some s′ when the operation applies and None when its safety checks (Table 3) reject it, leaving the state unchanged (e.g., a write with no free block). Every operation-level theorem (§5.3) assumes the step succeeded, i.e., that step returned Some s′. A rejected operation produces no successor state, so there is nothing to constrain. 

Table 3: The six FTL operations, their effect on the FTL state, and safety constraint.                        

> Operation Effect on state Key constraint
> COpRead (a, p )identity – (no data if aunmapped or page invalid)
> COpWrite (a, p, d )
> stale the old page, program a fresh one from the owner’s write frontier
> a < addr _space ,p < pages _per _block ;
> alabelled; a page available
> COpInvalidate (a, p )mark mapped page PS _Invalid – (no effect if aunmapped)
> COpSetTag (a, p, tag )update the integrity tag of the mapped page – (no effect if aunmapped or page invalid)
> COpGC relocate the victim’s live pages, erase and free it a reclaimable victim; every live page relocates successfully
> COpWearLevel the same, with a different victim choice the same

5.1.4. Command Semantics. Each of CertiFlash’s six opera-tions expands into a sequence of commands . A faulty FTL can is-sue these commands directly. CertiFlash defines ten commands, categorized into flash and metadata commands. The flash com-mands are PrimRead , PrimProgram , and PrimErase , which perform NAND read, program, and erase [180]. PrimProgram 

also writes the page’s out-of-band area (§2.1.2), including the reverse mapping and integrity tag supplied by the FTL. The seven metadata commands do not write the flash array. 

PrimMapAddr and PrimRemap install and redirect mappings, 

PrimInvalidate marks a page stale, removes its forward mapping and clears its role, so a stale page counts as nei-ther user data nor metadata, PrimFreePush returns a block to the free pool, and PrimSetTag writes a page’s integrity tag. Two barriers bracket a compound operation without changing state. For example, a write to a fresh address ex-pands into four commands: an opening barrier, PrimMapAddr ,

PrimProgram , and a closing barrier. Rewriting an address first uses PrimInvalidate to mark the old page stale because NAND flash cannot overwrite in place (§2.1.1). An operation expands only when it is valid. A rejected operation, such as a write outside the address space, issues no commands. 

PrimErase erases a block and returns it to the free pool in one command, so no expansion emits PrimFreePush ; that command is there for an FTL that issues commands directly. 7Table 4: The 27 clauses of the global FTL invariant, grouped by primary purpose into five categories. 

Category Inv. Description 

Mapping Inv 0 Every live page is the target of some logical page in the L2P map. Inv 1 Every L2P entry maps an in-bounds logical page to an in-bounds physical page. Inv 2 The L2P map is injective: no two logical pages point to the same physical page. Inv 3 If a logical page maps to a live physical page, that page’s reverse mapping names the same logical page (forward matches reverse). Inv 4 If a live page’s reverse mapping names a logical page, the L2P map sends that logical page back to this page (reverse matches forward). Isolation Inv 5 No block that holds a mapped page appears in the free list. Inv 6 Every page of a free block is erased and carries no metadata, so a recycled block keeps no owner or tag. Inv 7 A live page mapped from address a records a’s owning tenant and namespace. Inv 8 Every block in the free list is a valid block index ( b < total_blocks ). Integrity Inv 9 Every live page carries an integrity tag. Inv 10 Every in-bounds block is free, open for writing, in use (the target of some logical page), or a garbage block holding a stale page and awaiting reclamation. Inv 11 No block appears twice in the free list. Inv 12 An in-bounds block that holds a metadata page is in use or holds a stale page (derivable, as are Inv 15 from Inv 16 , and Inv 2 from Inv 3 and Inv 22 ). Inv 13 Every live page is a user-data page. Inv 14 Every user-data page is live and holds a data value. Inv 15 Every metadata page is non-erased. Inv 16 Every erased page has no role assigned. Ownership Inv 17 Every block that free_block marks free has no owning tenant and no owning namespace. Inv 18 A block that holds a mapped page carries the tenant and namespace of the address mapped there, so block-level and address-level ownership agree. Inv 19 Every defined region covers addresses within addr_space . No clause ties a region’s tenant to the per-address labels; vendor setup installs both. Allocation Inv 20 An open block is in bounds, not free, marked open, has write_ptr ≤ pages_per_block , and is open for one owner, which owns it or nobody does. Inv 21 Every page at or beyond an open block’s write frontier is still erased and carries no metadata. Inv 22 The L2P map points only at live pages. Inv 23 Every block marked open has an owner it is open for. Inv 24 free_block and the free list ( free_block_list ) agree on which blocks are free. Inv 25 Every page below an open block’s write frontier has been written, i.e., is not erased. Inv 26 Every mapped address has an owning tenant and namespace. 

5.2. Global Security Contract 

The contract has two parts. The global invariant constrains the FTL’s internal state. The refinement relation ties the concrete state to the abstract specification. 

Definition 5.2 (FTL Invariant) . The global FTL invariant 

ftl _invariant (s) is the conjunction of 27 clauses, Inv 0(s)∧· · · ∧ Inv 26 (s), shown in Table 4, with two well-formedness conjuncts, WF 0(s) and WF 1(s).2

Design of the invariant. We derived the clauses from prior FTL designs and their known failure modes. From these in-variants we prove refinement to the idealized block device (Theorem 5.3). That specification is written independently of the invariant, so functional correctness is measured against an external standard rather than against the clauses themselves. From the same set we also prove the three properties of our threat model, tenant isolation, data integrity, and block own-ership. A stronger threat model adds clauses to the set. Each new clause needs a preservation proof under all six operations, and every FTL already verified re-discharges its hypotheses over the extended invariant. 

Definition 5.3 (Refinement Relation) . The refinement relation 

R ⊆ S × FTLState is defined as 

R(h, s ) ≜ ∀a, p, d. h (a, p ) = d ⇒ ∃ b, q. 

l2p _map (s, a, p ) = Some (b, q ) ∧

page _state (s, b, q ) = PS _Valid (d).

(1) 

Equation (1) relates the two devices by what a read returns. Whenever the abstract device holds data d at address a and 

> 2

WF 0 restates pages _per _block > 0 and ignores its state argument. WF 1

says page _state is defined at every in-range block and page, which holds of every state because it is a total function. Neither constrains an FTL, which is why we do not count them among the clauses. 

page offset p, the concrete device maps the logical page (a, p )

to some physical page that is live and holds d, so reading (a, p )

returns d on both. 

5.3. Proving the Global Security Contract 

CertiFlash proves the invariant at both levels of §5.1, i.e., the 

operation level and the command level . However, refinement is proved only at the operation level. It carries to the command level by agreement , which we explain in §5.3.2. 

5.3.1. Operation Level. The verification guarantees are three composable theorems: (i) the invariant is preserved by every operation, (ii) each operation preserves the refinement relation, and (iii) both properties compose over whole traces (Figure 2). 

h0 h1 · · · hn

s0 s1 · · · sn

σ1

σ1

R R R

abstract concrete Inv at every si

Figure 2: Trace-level simulation. Each operation ( σi) matches between abstract ( hi) and concrete ( si), and R and the global invariant hold throughout. 

Theorem 5.1 (Invariant Preservation) . For every state s,operation σ, and successor s′, if ftl _invariant (s) and 

step (s, σ ) = Some s′, then ftl _invariant (s′).Proof. By case analysis on σ, one lemma per operation, each re-establishing all 27 clauses. The write case is the largest, because an out-of-place write invalidates the old page, programs a new one, repairs both directions of the mapping, and advances the write frontier. The maintenance cases lean hardest on Inv 11 ,Inv 15 , Inv 17 , and Inv 24 .

Theorem 5.2 (Stepwise Simulation) . Let abs _step (h, σ ) ap-ply σ to the abstract device, where reads, tag writes, and the two 

8maintenance operations leave h unchanged. For every h, s, σ, and 

s′, if R(h, s ), ftl _invariant (s), and step (s, σ ) = Some s′,then R(abs _step (h, σ ), s ′).Proof. By case analysis on σ. Host-visible cases follow from matching write and invalidate semantics. Maintenance cases follow chiefly from Inv 2, Inv 4, and Inv 22 .

Theorem 5.3 (Refinement and Preservation Under Traces) . Let 

abs _exec (h, ops ) apply ops to h via the abstract semantics, and let exec (s, ops ) fold step over ops , returning None if any step is rejected. For every trace ops , if ftl _invariant (s), R(h, s ),and exec (s, ops ) = Some s′, then R(abs _exec (h, ops ), s ′)

and ftl _invariant (s′).Proof. By induction on ops , applying Theorems 5.1 and 5.2. Together, the three theorems give an end-to-end guarantee. We prove separately that the initial state q0 satisfies every clause. Every state a valid execution reaches from q0 therefore satisfies every clause of the global invariant, and the execution refines the abstract device’s run of the same trace. 

5.3.2. Command Level. CertiFlash fixes the command se-quence for each of its six operations with op _primitives :

FTLState → COp → (list FlashPrimitive )? . We prove two properties of this expansion. (i) Agreement shows that, from a state satisfying the global invariant, an operation and its command sequence produce the same state, connecting the operation-level proof in Theorem 5.1 to the command level. (ii) 

Realizability shows that every program in the sequence targets an erased page when it executes, ensuring that the sequence can execute on NAND flash. Agreement alone does not provide this guarantee. These guarantees apply when the command sequence comes from op _primitives . A faulty FTL can instead issue com-mands directly, bypassing the operation already proved correct and its expansion. CertiFlash therefore gives each command a precondition bundle , which is a set of decidable checks on the command and the relevant FTL state, evaluated before the command executes (Table 5). 3 Theorem 5.4 proves that a com-mand whose bundle holds preserves the global invariant. §7.2 shows that each failure we formalize results from issuing a command without satisfying its precondition bundle. 

Theorem 5.4 (Precondition Soundness) . For each command π

with precondition bundle pre π and application function apply π ,

ftl _invariant (s) ∧ pre π (s, args )

⇒ ftl _invariant (apply π (s, args )) . 

> 3The bundles apply to commands issued individually, not to intermediate commands in an operation’s expansion. The final command restores the invariant, and §3.2 assumes that each operation runs to completion.

Table 5: The ten commands and their precondition bun-dles (commands that share a bundle are grouped). A command issued on its own preserves the invariant if its bundle holds (Theorem 5.4).          

> Command Precondition bundle
> PrimRead None. The command changes no state. An FTL that must block raw reads (FS#5) adds an access-control check here.
> PrimProgram Destination block and page in bounds. The reverse mapping it writes names a logical page that the forward map sends to this page, and it carries an integrity tag. Every page below the destination in the block is written, and every page above it is erased and unstamped. If the program opens a block, the owner’s previously open block has its first page written. Issued with no tag, it marks a page live with none.
> PrimErase Target block in bounds, not in the free pool, not open for writing, and mapped by no live page.
> PrimFreePush Returns a block to the free pool. Target block in bounds, erased and unstamped, owned by no one, mapped by no live page, not open, and not already free. Issued on a free block, it lists the block twice.
> PrimMapAddr ,
> PrimRemap
> Target page live and mapped by no other logical page.
> PrimInvalidate Target page live.
> PrimSetTag , barriers None. PrimSetTag acts only on a live page, and the barriers change no state.

## 6. FTL Verification Workflow 

CertiFlash verifies an FTL in one of two modes. (i) Direct veri-fication (§6.1) proves the FTL’s operations correct and secure end-to-end against the global invariant. (ii) Modular verifica-tion (§6.2) applies to a design that keeps the invariant. The designer describes their FTL through the Rocq module type 

CUSTOM _FTL and discharges five hypotheses, rather than re-proving the 27 clauses over their own state. The designer sup-plies their FTL’s state and its four operations as functions over that state. The designer supplies a refinement map that projects that state onto CertiFlash’s model. The designer discharges the five hypotheses stated in Figure 3 over the projected state; how much proof this takes depends on what the design changed. The designer then packages the five proofs into one certificate theorem. Rocq’s kernel and coqchk re-check every theorem the certificate depends on. 

6.1. Direct Verification 

In direct verification, the designer writes their FTL as a Rocq model over FTLState and proves, for each of its operations, that the operation preserves ftl _invariant (Definition 5.2) and the refinement relation R (Definition 5.3). CertiFlash per-forms these proofs once for its six operations (Theorems 5.1– 5.3). A design requires direct verification when it changes the invariant, because the new invariant cannot reuse Certi-Flash’s invariant-preservation proofs. For example, deduplica-tion maps identical logical pages to a single physical page to avoid storing duplicate data. This removes injectivity (Inv 2)and changes the reverse-mapping clause (Inv 3), so CertiFlash’s theorems no longer apply. Deduplication therefore proves its operations against the modified invariant (case (d) of §7.3). 96.2. Modular Verification                                                                      

> Let I(s)≜ftl _invariant (user _to _model (s)) ,
> ready ≜user _write _ready , and
> adm (s, a, p )≜a < addr _space ∧p < pages _per _block ∧ais labelled with a tenant and a namespace in s.
> Hyp1 ≜∀s, a, p, d. adm (s, a, p )∧ready (s, a, p )∧I(s)
> ⇒I(user _write (s, a, p, d ))
> Hyp2 ≜∀s. I (s)⇒I(user _gc (s))
> Hyp3 ≜∀s. I (s)⇒I(user _wear _level (s))
> Hyp4 ≜∀s, a, p, d. adm (s, a, p )∧ready (s, a, p )∧I(s)
> ⇒user _read (user _write (s, a, p, d ), a, p ) = Some d
> Hyp5 ≜∀s, a 1, a 2, p 1, p 2, d 1, d 2.
> let s′=user _write (s, a 1, p 1, d 1)in let s′′ =user _write (s′, a 2, p 2, d 2)in
> (a1̸=a2∨p1̸=p2)∧adm (s, a 1, p 1)∧adm (s′, a 2, p 2)
> ∧I(s)∧ready (s, a 1, p 1)∧ready (s′, a 2, p 2)
> ⇒user _read (s′′ , a 1, p 1) = Some d1

Figure 3: The five hypotheses an FTL designer’s CUSTOM _FTL 

module must discharge. Hyp1–Hyp3: per-operation invariant preservation. Hyp4: read-after-write correctness. Hyp5: cross-address non-interference. 

Step 1: Describing the FTL. The designer supplies a state type user _state , which may be any Rocq type holding the FTL’s runtime structures, four operations over it ( user _read ,

user _write , user _gc , user _wear _level ), and a readiness predicate user _write _ready recording when a write is well-defined. The interface covers the four operations a new design is most likely to reimplement. Invalidation and tag setting are fixed metadata bookkeeping rather than per-design policy, so a custom FTL keeps CertiFlash’s semantics for them and Theorem 5.1 covers them unchanged. 

Step 2: Projecting onto the model. The designer supplies 

user _to _model : user _state → FTLState , which projects the FTL’s state onto the core model. The inherited invariant is then I(s) ≜ ftl _invariant (user _to _model (s)) , and every hypothesis in Step 3 is stated over I. A design that adds fields CertiFlash does not know about (e.g., DFTL’s cached mapping table, case (b) of §7.3) projects them away; a design that only re-implements how existing fields are computed projects onto the same fields. 

Step 3: Discharging the five hypotheses. The five hypothe-ses of Figure 3 are properties CertiFlash’s own model satisfies, so an FTL that satisfies them over its own operations obtains invariant preservation over its own operations. Hyp 1–Hyp 3

state that write, garbage collection, and wear leveling preserve 

I.4 Hyp 4 and Hyp 5 are the two data-correctness claims: a read returns the data last written to its address, and a write to one address does not disturb another. How the designer discharges them depends on what the design changed. A design changes the framework in one of four ways, and §7.3 evaluates one of each: (a) new state , (b) new implementation , (c) new local invariant , and (d) new invariant . Cases (a)–(c) keep CertiFlash’s   

> 4Read returns the state unchanged, so it has no post-state to constrain, and the interface accordingly gives user _read no result state.

global invariant and take the modular route. Case (d) changes it, so it takes direct verification (§6.1). A design can also add new operations. CUSTOM _FTL does not require a command sequence for them: its four operations are functions over user _state , and the five hypotheses es-tablish their correctness. When a new operation changes only the design’s own state, as the counter-increment operation in case (a), CertiFlash’s reuse library carries these proofs to the extended FTL. When it changes CertiFlash’s state, the de-signer instead expresses the operation as a command sequence (Step 1) and proves that each command satisfies its precon-dition bundle (§5.3.2, Table 5). Theorem 5.4 then preserves 

ftl _invariant across the sequence, without proving its 27 clauses again. CertiFlash supplies the per-command results needed for this proof, but does not generate the command sequence. The same argument applies when a faulty FTL issues com-mands directly. Checking each command’s precondition bun-dle preserves ftl _invariant after every command. 

Step 4: Collecting the certificate. With the five hypotheses discharged, the designer instantiates one module, Validator (F : CUSTOM _FTL ), which pack-ages the five proofs into a single certificate theorem, 

custom _ftl _security _suite . Validator proves nothing itself. It only assembles the proofs the designer supplied, so instantiating it cannot fail and adds no proof obligation. 

Step 5: Checking everything. The certificate is a Rocq the-orem, so Rocq’s kernel checks it, and coqchk re-checks the compiled modules against the kernel and reports every axiom they depend on. CertiFlash’s own development reports none: no admitted lemmas, no classical reasoning, and no axioms. A designer’s certificate inherits that status exactly when their own proofs add no axioms, which the same check confirms. We evaluate the verification effort of these cases in §7 following this workflow. 

## 7. Evaluation 

7.1. Evaluation Methodology 

We build and check every proof with Rocq 8.20.1 on an Apple M5 Pro laptop. A clean build takes 93 seconds. The develop-ment is 28 Rocq files and 21,884 lines, with 432 Definition sand 778 Lemma /Theorem /Corollary statements, every one closed with Qed . The base framework that every design inherits is 16,489 of those lines. Table 6 divides the base framework by component, from the concrete model and operations, through the global invariant and its preservation, to the checker and the failure surfaces. The four case studies (§7.3) build on this base: each discharges the five CUSTOM_FTL hypotheses to in-herit these proofs rather than re-proving the invariant over its own state. 

7.2. Reachability of Failures 

§5.3.2 proves the precondition bundles sufficient : a command whose bundle holds preserves the global invariant (Theo-rem 5.4). This section proves them necessary . For each of 10 Table 6: Lines the framework proves once, inherited by every FTL, by component.           

> Component Lines Framework (proved once, inherited by every FTL) Concrete model, operations, geometry 786 Command level: boundary, agreement, realizability 1,862 Global invariant, preservation, and precondition bundles 5,834 Refinement + abstract specification 1,212 Crash recovery and crash refinement 1,716 Designer interface + composition library 817 Checker, test harness, tactic pack 3,088 Failure surfaces and reachability 1,174
> Total inherited 16,489

the five failure surfaces of §4.1, we exhibit a single command that an FTL can issue with its bundle unchecked and prove in Rocq that the resulting state falsifies the invariant. We describe this using ten failures for five attack surfaces in Table 7 (one row per failure), each naming the command that produces it and a clause it falsifies. A failure is reachable when a single FTL action f on 

FTLState carries a well-formed state, i.e., one satisfying 

ftl _invariant , to a state the invariant rejects. We prove two results per failure. First, for every state meeting the hypothesis stated in its theorem, e.g., the victim page being mapped or the target page being erased, the command that performs f is realizable and f (s) falsifies the invariant. Second, one concrete state satisfying all 27 clauses reaches such an f (s) at all five surfaces, so no failure is an artifact of a malformed start. 

Table 7: The ten failures at the five failure surfaces, each pro-duced by a single command issued with its precondition bundle unchecked. The Clause column gives the clause each proof uses; the state reached can falsify others as well. Every failure is conditional on a hypothesis stated in its theorem.                                  

> FS Violation Command Clause FS#1 Erase of a mapped block PrimErase Inv 5
> FS#1 Erase of an out-of-range block PrimErase Inv 8
> FS#2 L2P aliasing, cross-address PrimMapAddr Inv 2
> FS#2 L2P aliasing, intra-address PrimMapAddr Inv 2
> FS#2 Namespace reassignment PrimMapAddr Inv 7
> FS#3 Ownership override PrimMapAddr Inv 7
> FS#3 Namespace-enforcement override PrimMapAddr Inv 7
> FS#4 Integrity-tag removal PrimProgram Inv 9
> FS#5 Free-block duplication PrimFreePush Inv 11
> FS#5 Cross-namespace remap PrimMapAddr Inv 7

Together the ten proofs name six distinct clauses, i.e., Inv 2,Inv 5, Inv 7, Inv 8, Inv 9, and Inv 11 (Table 4). Four of the ten falsify Inv 7 through an unchecked PrimMapAddr , and three of those four have identical theorem statements. We list them separately because a surface names the part of the SSD the FTL reaches through (§4.1), and an FTL can issue this command at three of the five surfaces. 

7.2.1. An Example: L2P Aliasing at FS#2. From a state in which page p of a victim address av maps to physical page pa ,an FTL issues PrimMapAddr (aa, p, pa ), which maps page p of the attacker address aa to the same physical page. 

Theorem 7.1 (FS#2 L2P aliasing) . For every state s with 

l2p _map (av , p ) = Some pa and aa̸ = av , the command 

PrimMapAddr (aa, p, pa ) is realizable in s, and the state it reaches falsifies ftl _invariant .Proof. An FTL that skips the bundle of PrimMapAddr can issue it in any state, and the command is not a program, so it is realizable in every state (§5.3.2). After it, the logical pages 

(aa, p ) and (av , p ) both map to pa , since the update at (aa, p )

leaves every other entry untouched. As aa̸ = av , injectivity (Inv 2) fails at witness (( aa, p ), (av , p ), pa ).The aliased mapping is a confidentiality breach: a read of the attacker’s page returns the victim’s data, as §4.1.2 demonstrates on real firmware. CertiFlash rejects it at the command that causes it. The bundle of PrimMapAddr (Table 5) requires the target page to be live and mapped by no other logical page, and in the state of Theorem 7.1 the victim’s entry already maps (av , p ) to pa , so the bundle rejects the command before it executes. 

7.2.2. Coverage. The remaining nine failures are proved and prevented the same way, and either route to a verified FTL rules out all ten. An FTL built from CertiFlash’s operations starts well-formed and never reaches any of the ten states, because every operation preserves the invariant (Theorem 5.1). An FTL that issues commands directly, but gates each on its bundle, reaches none of them either, because a command whose bundle holds preserves the invariant (Theorem 5.4). 

7.3. Case Studies 

CertiFlash proves its global invariant once, and every design that keeps it inherits the proof by discharging five hypotheses rather than re-proving the 27 clauses. We evaluate this on four FTL designs, one for each way a design departs from the framework: it adds orthogonal state (a), reimplements an operation (b), adds an operation (c), or changes the global invariant (d). The first three keep the invariant and reuse its proofs without restating a clause; the fourth changes the invariant and verifies its model directly. Across the four, a designer writes 27 to 3,231 lines against the framework’s 16,489, and the effort tracks the local invariant a design adds. We present each design in the same form. 

(a) New state. The designer adds a per-block read counter that records a block’s accumulated read-disturb exposure. FTLs keep such counters to refresh a block before read disturbance corrupts the pages neighboring its heavily read pages [169, 172]. The extension adds three definitions: (i) the counter, (ii) a counter-increment operation, which the controller runs to account for each read, and (iii) a refresh check that fires once a block’s count crosses a threshold. • Verification Type: Modular. The read-disturb counter does not affect FTL correctness. No base operation reads it, and reads return the same data regardless of its value. The global invariant also does not mention the counter. The five 

CUSTOM _FTL hypotheses therefore carry over unchanged. • Effort. The read-disturb tracker adds 27 lines on top of Cer-tiFlash. Its three definitions and the extension-state decla-ration take 25 lines. The remaining two lines prove that 11 incrementing the counter preserves the global invariant and leaves reads unchanged. Thus, nearly all of the cost is in defining the new state and operations; the tracker requires no new global invariant. 

(b) New implementation. Demand-based Flash Translation Layer (DFTL) [138] is an example of a new FTL implementation that preserves CertiFlash’s global invariant. DFTL keeps only a working set of the L2P mapping in DRAM, in a cached mapping table (CMT), and stores the remaining entries in translation pages on flash. A read whose mapping is not in the CMT fetches the mapping from its translation page. Before evicting a dirty mapping from the CMT, DFTL writes it back to flash. Thus, DFTL changes how the FTL stores and looks up the L2P mapping. • Verification Type: Modular. DFTL adds the CMT and an im-age of the translation pages to CertiFlash’s flash state. Writes, garbage collection, and wear leveling use CertiFlash’s ver-ified operations to update the flash state and then update the CMT. CertiFlash’s global invariant constrains only the flash state, and DFTL’s refinement map returns that state directly, so DFTL reuses the invariant unchanged. The de-signer proves one local invariant that connects the CMT and translation-page image to the flash state. It requires an invari-ant dftl _ok that (i) the CMT is bounded, (ii) every cached entry agrees with l2p _map , (iii) every clean entry agrees with the translation-page image, and (iv) the translation-page image provides the mapping for every uncached page. The new proof shows that eviction and write-back preserve 

dftl _ok . The five CUSTOM _FTL hypotheses then follow. Cer-tiFlash’s verified operations preserve the global invariant. 

dftl _ok keeps the CMT consistent with l2p _map , so DFTL reads the correct physical page. • Effort. DFTL adds 844 lines on top of CertiFlash. The cache model and DFTL operations take 509 lines, and proving that these operations preserve dftl _ok takes 192 lines. The re-maining 143 lines discharge the five CUSTOM _FTL hypotheses. DFTL does not re-prove CertiFlash’s 27-clause global invari-ant. Instead, each operation invokes CertiFlash’s preserva-tion theorem once to preserve the entire invariant. Thus, most of DFTL’s verification effort goes toward its new cache state and dftl _ok , rather than re-verifying properties al-ready proved by CertiFlash. 

(c) New local invariant. MegIS [33] performs metagenomic analysis inside the SSD, which reads long contiguous ranges of logical addresses sequentially. MegIS adds coarse-grained 

range mappings to the FTL, one per such range. A range map-ping covers the whole range with a single entry: a logical start address a, a physical start block b, and a length ℓ, recording that [a, a + ℓ) is stored contiguously in the physical blocks 

[b, b + ℓ), so a scan reads the range without a per-page lookup. • Verification Type: Modular, as an extension of DFTL. Produc-tion FTLs cache their mapping tables, as DFTL does [138, 194], making DFTL a realistic base for an in-storage system. Building MegIS on DFTL also shows that verified extensions can stack. MegIS reuses DFTL’s flash state and CertiFlash’s verified operations, and adds one local invariant, Irange . This invariant requires each range mapping to agree with the L2P map for every page in the range. Writes, garbage collection, and wear leveling can relocate a page in a mapped range, making the range mapping stale. MegIS therefore drops any affected range mapping before these operations and proves that the resulting operations preserve Irange . Host opera-tions do not use range mappings, so MegIS reuses DFTL’s five CUSTOM _FTL hypotheses unchanged. The scan path that motivates the design is verified separately: resolving an ad-dress through a range mapping returns the same physical page the L2P map would, whenever Irange holds. • Effort. MegIS adds 1,293 lines on top of DFTL. Most model the range mappings and prove that garbage collection, wear leveling, and write preserve Irange . The five hypotheses take only 13 lines, against DFTL’s 143, because those lines re-instantiate DFTL’s hypothesis proofs over MegIS’s state rather than redo them. MegIS re-proves neither the global invariant nor DFTL’s dftl _ok ; its new work is confined to 

Irange and its preservation. Thus the effort concentrates on the one local invariant the design adds, not on the guarantees it inherits. 

(d) Changed global invariant. Deduplication [158] stores identical data from multiple logical pages in a single physical page. This sharing conflicts with the global invariant. Inv 2

requires the L2P mapping to be injective, while deduplication maps multiple logical pages to the same physical page. • Verification Type: Direct. The modular interface does not ap-ply to deduplication because it reuses CertiFlash’s global in-variant, while deduplication changes it. We therefore model deduplication separately and prove preservation of the modi-fied invariant end-to-end. Three changes are necessary. First, supporting shared pages requires removing injectivity (Inv 2)and changing the reverse-mapping clause (Inv 3). Removing Inv 2 alone is insufficient: Inv 3 together with Inv 22 implies injectivity, preventing a deduplicating write. We therefore remove Inv 2 and modify Inv 3 to allow several logical pages to share one physical page. Second, sharing changes reloca-tion. CertiFlash normally uses a page’s reverse mapping to find the logical page to relocate. A shared page has multi-ple logical mappings but only one reverse mapping, so this procedure would update one mapping and leave the others pointing to the erased page. Deduplication instead scans the mapping table and updates every logical page that shares the physical page. It must also update a shared page’s reverse mapping when the logical page recorded there is overwrit-ten, which cannot be done in place on NAND flash. Third, sharing remains subject to isolation. Inv 7 requires all logical pages sharing a physical page to have the same tenant and namespace. Deduplication can therefore share pages only within a tenant’s namespace. • Effort. Deduplication adds 3,231 lines, making it the most ex-pensive case. Twenty-five of the 27 invariant clauses and 47 framework lemmas carry over unchanged, while re-proving the remaining results takes 1,691 lines. About half of these 12 re-proved lines are identical to the framework proof they replace. These proofs cannot be reused because each preser-vation theorem is stated for a specific invariant, even when its proof remains unchanged. Abstracting preservation over the invariant would make them reusable. 

## 8. Related Work 

FTL and flash file-system verification. Qiao et al. [155] model FTL algorithms in Rocq as a state machine over map-ping tables, free-block pools, and per-page metadata, define functional correctness as refinement to a disk-like specifica-tion, and demonstrate the framework on the hybrid-mapped BAST FTL [156]. SCFTL [153] is a checkpointing FTL veri-fied for snapshot consistency , i.e., recovery to the state at the last flush, using Agda, the Serval symbolic executor, and Z3. Flashix [154, 231–233] is a concurrent, crash-safe flash file sys-tem verified in KIV [234] as a stack of refinement-connected components, including garbage collection and wear leveling. Cogent [227] compiles a linearly typed language to C with a machine-checked refinement proof. None of these proofs transfers to a new design. SCFTL, Flashix, and Cogent each verify one fixed implementation, and Flashix’s layers are mod-ular within Flashix rather than across designs. Qiao et al. build a framework in which an FTL that discharges five hypotheses over a supplied invariant refines a disk, and demonstrate it on BAST. Two of those five, read-after-write and non-interference between pages, are close to CertiFlash’s Hyp4 and Hyp5. Their invariant is a parameter, so a second FTL supplies its own and re-proves all five, and their model has three operations, i.e., initialize, read, and write, so garbage collection and wear leveling lie outside it. CertiFlash instead fixes the invariant (Definition 5.2), and every FTL that implements CUSTOM _FTL 

inherits it (§6.2) at the cost measured in §7. 

Verifying flash below the file system. A decade of work on the verified-flash-filestore challenge [235] sits below the file system and above the chip. Butterfield et al. [236] mechanize a model of the NAND command set, the layer our commands abstract. Kang and Jackson [237] check a flash file system with wear leveling and reclamation against an abstract device in Alloy, Damchoom and Butler [238] develop a flash filestore by Event-B refinement, and Taverne and Pronk [239] model check one in SPIN under power loss. Closest to an FTL, Pfähler et al. [240] verify Flashix’s erase-block-management layer, i.e., block mapping, wear leveling, and power-failure recovery, in KIV. Model checking has also been applied to shipping FTL-layer firmware: Kim et al. [241] check Samsung’s OneNAND driver, Tripathy et al. [242] model the NAND chip interface, and TxFlash [243] model checks the commit protocol of an SSD that exports atomic writes. All of these check one design against a functional specification. None states a property that a second, differently-designed FTL inherits, and none constrains tenant ownership. 

Properties beyond functional correctness. The work above verifies functional correctness alone. Tripathy et al. [228] model-check security properties of one ransomware-resistant FTL rather than proving a contract that other FTLs can inherit. CertiFlash additionally proves that every operation preserves tenant isolation, integrity-tag coverage, and block ownership (Theorem 5.1), and, to our knowledge, is the first machine-checked proof of these properties for an FTL, the first such contract that a second FTL design inherits, and the first for-malization of where an FTL can violate them, as five failure surfaces (§4.1) with a reachable failure on each (§7.2). 

Layered, concurrent, and crash-safe storage verification. 

Argosy [244] composes layered storage proofs under recovery refinement , Perennial [245] extends this to concurrent, crash-safe systems in Iris, and GoJournal [246] and the work of Hance et al. [247] verify a concurrent journal and a key-value store. These frameworks compose proofs across the layers of one stack and fix no property that competing implementations of a single layer must satisfy, so they do not transfer a guar-antee from one FTL to another. CertiFlash models one FTL invocation at a time. Perennial is the most directly applicable infrastructure for adding concurrency. 

File systems verified above a block device. FSCQ and DFSCQ [248, 249] verify a UNIX-like file system in Rocq with Crash Hoare Logic, Yggdrasil [250] verifies the Yxv6 journaling file system by push-button SMT, and DiskSec [251] proves data confidentiality for the sealed-block file system SFSCQ. All three treat the device below them as a trusted layer and state no property about it, which is the layer CertiFlash’s invariant constrains. DiskSec’s confidentiality guarantee is stronger than CertiFlash’s reachability results, but applies to one system rather than to any FTL meeting an interface. 

Verified kernels and compilers. seL4 [252, 253] and Cer-tiKOS [254] verify a fixed kernel with the same per-operation preservation pattern as CertiFlash, and CompCert [255] proves a C compiler correct via per-pass forward simulations. Certi-Flash uses a single forward simulation to an idealized block device, with maintenance operations absorbed as stuttering steps, and is parametric across FTLs rather than tied to one system. 

Information-flow security. Goguen and Meseguer [256] define noninterference , usually discharged through a per-call unwinding condition. CertiFlash’s isolation guarantees are state properties (Inv 7, Inv 17 , Inv 18 ), not information-flow prop-erties. 

SSD security mechanisms. NVMe namespaces [136], NVM sets [137], and AES-256 self-encryption [257] provide firmware-resident isolation and at-rest confidentiality without for-mal verification, and commercial self-encrypting drives have shown critical weaknesses [221]. FlashVault [258] moves en-cryption into NAND, IceClave [204] places flash management in a TEE and protects it from untrusted offloaded programs, the opposite trust direction to ours, and FlashGuard [259] and SSD-Insider [260] keep stale pages in the FTL to recover data after a ransomware attack. A second line takes the drive it-self as the adversary: D-Shield [261] moves encryption and integrity verification to the processor so that SSD firmware sits outside the trusted base, SGX-SSD [262] anchors in-drive versioning in a host enclave, and eNVMe [222] builds a mali-13 cious NVMe firmware on real hardware. These works defend a host against a drive it does not trust; CertiFlash instead gives the FTL designer a proof that their own firmware cannot reach a violating state. Cross-tenant leakage has also been shown through the device without any FTL modification, by timing SSD contention [224] and the host memory buffer that holds the mapping table [225]; those channels are outside our model (§3.2). CertiFlash is complementary. Its precondition bundles are decidable conjunctions over FTL state, and each has an executable boolean form in the artifact. An FTL that gates every command on its bundle, extended with, e.g., an NVMe-namespace check, preserves the invariant at each one (Theorem 5.4). We prove the bundles sufficient; we do not build the firmware that evaluates them. 

## 9. Conclusion 

CertiFlash is a Rocq-mechanized verification framework for customizable Flash Translation Layers. It defines a 27-clause global invariant over a 16-field FTL state built on a page-granular L2P mapping table and the per-page reverse map-ping that NAND’s out-of-band area carries, proves invariant preservation and refinement to an idealized block device, and packages these proofs behind a Rocq module type so a compli-ant FTL discharges five hypotheses rather than redoing them. We additionally formalize five failure surfaces and show that each failure is reachable by a single command issued without its precondition bundle, making any certified FTL provably free of every one. We demonstrate the failures on a Daisy-Plus OpenSSD. Across four case studies, a designer adds 27 to 3,231 lines against a 16,489-line framework. The proofs rest on the Rocq kernel and standard library alone, with no admitted lemmas, no classical reasoning, and no axioms. 

## References 

[1] Onur Mutlu. Memory Scaling: A Systems Architecture Perspective. IMW , 2013. [2] Svilen Kanev, Juan Pablo Darago, Kim Hazelwood, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Tipp Moseley, Gu-Yeon Wei, and David Brooks. Profiling a Warehouse-Scale Computer. In ISCA , 2015. [3] Shibo Wang and Engin Ipek. Reducing Data Movement Energy via Online Data Clustering and Encoding. In MICRO , 2016. [4] Sally A McKee. Reflections on the Memory Wall. In CF , 2004. [5] Onur Mutlu and Lavanya Subramanian. Research Problems and Opportunities in Memory Systems. SUPERFRI , 2014. [6] Jisung Park, Roknoddin Azizi, Geraldo F. Oliveira, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Rakesh Nadig, David Novo, Juan Gómez-Luna, Myungsuk Kim, and Onur Mutlu. Flash-Cosmos: In-Flash Bulk Bitwise Operations Using Inherent Computation Capability of NAND Flash Memory. In MICRO , 2022. [7] Nastaran Hajinazar, Geraldo F Oliveira, Sven Gregorio, João Dinis Ferreira, Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Minesh Patel, Mohammed Alser, Saugata Ghose, Juan Gómez-Luna, and Onur Mutlu. SIMDRAM: A Framework for Bit-serial SIMD Processing-using-DRAM. In ASPLOS , 2021. [8] Boncheol Gu, Andre S. Yoon, Duck-Ho Bae, Insoon Jo, Jinyoung Lee, Jonghyun Yoon, Jeong-Uk Kang, Moonsang Kwon, Chanho Yoon, Sangyeun Cho, Jaeheon Jeong, and Duckhyun Chang. Biscuit: A Framework For Near-Data Processing of Big Data Workloads. In ISCA , 2016. [9] Onur Mutlu, Saugata Ghose, Juan Gómez-Luna, and Rachata Ausavarungnirun. A Modern Primer on Processing in Memory. In Emerging Computing: From Devices to Systems – Looking Beyond Moore and Von Neumann . Springer, 2022. [10] Amirali Boroumand, Saugata Ghose, Youngsok Kim, Rachata Ausavarungnirun, Eric Shiu, Rahul Thakur, Daehyun Kim, Aki Kuusela, Allan Knies, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, and Onur Mutlu. Google Workloads for Consumer Devices: Miti-gating Data Movement Bottlenecks. In ASPLOS , 2018. [11] Amirali Boroumand, Saugata Ghose, Berkin Akin, Ravi Narayanaswami, Ger-aldo F. Oliveira, Xiaoyu Ma, Eric Shiu, and Onur Mutlu. Google Neural Network Models for Edge Devices: Analyzing and Mitigating Machine Learning Inference Bottlenecks. In PACT , 2021. [12] Junwhan Ahn, Sungpack Hong, Sungjoo Yoo, Onur Mutlu, and Kiyoung Choi. A Scalable Processing-in-memory Accelerator for Parallel Graph Processing. In 

ISCA , 2015. [13] Junwhan Ahn, Sungjoo Yoo, Onur Mutlu, and Kiyoung Choi. PIM-Enabled In-structions: A Low-Overhead, Locality-Aware Processing-in-Memory Architecture. In ISCA , 2015. [14] Onur Mutlu, Saugata Ghose, Juan Gómez-Luna, and Rachata Ausavarungnirun. Processing Data Where It Makes Sense: Enabling In-Memory Computation. MicPro ,2019. [15] Onur Mutlu, Saugata Ghose, Juan Gómez-Luna, and Rachata Ausavarungnirun. Enabling Practical Processing in and near Memory for Data-Intensive Computing. In DAC , 2019. [16] Geraldo F. Oliveira, Juan Gómez-Luna, Lois Orosa, Saugata Ghose, Nandita Vi-jaykumar, Ivan Fernandez, Mohammad Sadrosadati, and Onur Mutlu. DAMOV: A New Methodology And Benchmark Suite For Evaluating Data Movement Bottle-necks. IEEE Access , 2021. [17] Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Nandita Vijaykumar, Geraldo F. Oliveira, Lois Orosa, Ivan Fernandez, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Konstantinos Kanellopoulos, Nastaran Haji-nazar, Juan Gómez-Luna, and Onur Mutlu. ALP: Alleviating CPU-Memory Data Movement Overheads in Memory-Centric Systems. TETC , 2023. [18] Vivek Seshadri, Donghyuk Lee, Thomas Mullins, Hasan Hassan, Amirali Boroumand, Jeremie Kim, Michael A Kozuch, Onur Mutlu, Phillip B Gibbons, and Todd C Mowry. Ambit: In-Memory Accelerator for Bulk Bitwise Operations Using Commodity DRAM Technology. In MICRO , 2017. [19] Congming Gao, Xin Xin, Youyou Lu, Youtao Zhang, Jun Yang, and Jiwu Shu. ParaBit: Processing Parallel Bitwise Operations in NAND Flash Memory-based SSDs. In MICRO , 2021. [20] Antonio Barbalace, Martin Decky, Javier Picorel, and Pramod Bhatotia. blockNDP: Block-storage Near Data Processing. In Middleware , 2020. [21] Aurelia Augusta and Stratos Idreos. JAFAR: Near-Data Processing for Databases. In SIGMOD , 2015. [22] Amirali Boroumand, Saugata Ghose, Minesh Patel, Hasan Hassan, Brandon Lucia, Rachata Ausavarungnirun, Kevin Hsieh, Nastaran Hajinazar, Krishna T. Malladi, Hongzhong Zheng, and Onur Mutlu. CoNDA: Efficient Cache Coherence Support for Near-Data Accelerators. In ISCA , 2019. [23] Ivan Fernandez, Ricardo Quislant, Christina Giannoula, Mohammed Alser, Juan Gomez-Luna, Eladio Gutierrez, Oscar Plata, and Onur Mutlu. NATSA: A Near-Data Processing Accelerator for Time Series Analysis. In ICCD , 2020. [24] Gagandeep Singh, Juan Gómez-Luna, Giovanni Mariani, Geraldo F Oliveira, Ste-fano Corda, Sander Stuijk, Onur Mutlu, and Henk Corporaal. NAPEL: Near-memory Computing Application Performance Prediction via Ensemble Learning. In DAC , 2019. [25] Mingyu Gao and Christos Kozyrakis. HRL: Efficient and Flexible Reconfigurable Logic for Near-Data Processing. In HPCA , 2016. [26] Joo Hwan Lee, Hui Zhang, Veronica Lagrange, Praveen Krishnamoorthy, Xiaodong Zhao, and Yang Seok Ki. SmartSSD: FPGA-Accelerated Near-Storage Data Analyt-ics on SSD. CAL , 2020. [27] Gagandeep Singh, Mohammed Alser, Damla Senol Cali, Dionysios Diamantopoulos, Juan Gómez-Luna, Henk Corporaal, and Onur Mutlu. FPGA-based Near-Memory Acceleration of Modern Data-Intensive Applications. IEEE Micro , 2021. [28] Wenqin Huangfu, Xueqi Li, Shuangchen Li, Xing Hu, Peng Gu, and Yuan Xie. MEDAL: Scalable DIMM Based Near Data Processing Accelerator for DNA Seeding Algorithm. In MICRO , 2019. [29] Shengwen Liang, Ying Wang, Cheng Liu, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. InS-DLA: An In-SSD Deep Learning Accelerator for Near-Data Processing. In FPL , 2019. [30] Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Jisung Park, Harun Mustafa, Jeremie S. Kim, Ataberk Olgun, Arvid Gollwitzer, Damla Senol Cali, Can Firtina, Haiyu Mao, Nour Almadhoun Alserr, Rachata Ausavarungnirun, Nandita Vijaykumar, Mohammed Alser, and Onur Mutlu. GenStore: A High-Performance In-Storage Processing System for Genome Sequence Analysis. In ASPLOS , 2022. [31] Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Talu Güloglu, Harun Mustafa, Can Firtina, Konstantina Koliogeorgi, Konstantinos Kanellopoulos, Haiyu Mao, Rakesh Nadig, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Jisung Park, and Onur Mutlu. SAGe: A Lightweight Algorithm-Architecture Co-Design for Mitigating the Data Preparation Bottleneck in Large-Scale Genome Sequence Analysis. In HPCA , 2026. [32] Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Harun Mustafa, Talu Güloglu, Rakesh Nadig, Konstantina Koliogeorgi, Susana Rebolledo Ruiz, Marc Rautmann, Furkan Eris, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Jisung Park, and Onur Mutlu. GRAINS: Enabling High-Performance and Low-Cost Graph-Based Genome Analysis via Storage-Aware Algorithm-Architecture Co-Design. In ISCA , 2026. [33] Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Harun Mustafa, Arvid Gollwitzer, Can Firtina, Julien Eudine, Haiyu Mao, Joël Lindegger, Meryem Banu Cavlak, Mo-hammed Alser, Jisung Park, and Onur Mutlu. MegIS: High-Performance, Energy-Efficient, and Low-Cost Metagenomic Analysis with In-Storage Processing. In 

ISCA , 2024. [34] Geraldo F Oliveira, Ataberk Olgun, Abdullah Giray Yağlıkçı, F Nisa Bostancı, Juan Gómez-Luna, Saugata Ghose, and Onur Mutlu. MIMDRAM: An End-to-End Processing-Using-DRAM System for High-Throughput, Energy-Efficient and Programmer-Transparent Multiple-Instruction Multiple-Data Computing. In 

HPCA , 2024. [35] Joel Nider, Craig Mustard, Andrada Zoltan, and Alexandra Fedorova. Processing in Storage Class Memory. In HotStorage , 2020. [36] Kevin Hsieh, Eiman Ebrahimi, Gwangsun Kim, Niladrish Chatterjee, Mike 

14 O’Conner, Nandita Vijaykumar, Onur Mutlu, and Stephen Keckler. Transparent Offloading and Mapping (TOM): Enabling Programmer-Transparent Near-Data Processing in GPU Systems. In ISCA , 2016. [37] Jaehyun Park, Jaewan Choi, Kwanhee Kyung, Michael Jaemin Kim, Yongsuk Kwon, Nam Sung Kim, and Jung Ho Ahn. AttAcc! Unleashing the Power of PIM for Batched Transformer-based Generative Model Inference. In ASPLOS , 2024. [38] Dan Chen, Hai Jin, Long Zheng, Yu Huang, Pengcheng Yao, Chuangyi Gui, Qing-gang Wang, Haifeng Liu, Haiheng He, Xiaofei Liao, and Ran Zheng. A General Offloading Approach for Near-DRAM Processing-In-Memory Architectures. In 

IPDPS , 2022. [39] Dongyang Li, Yafei Yang, Weijun Li, and Qing Yang. CISC: Coordinating Intelligent SSD and CPU to Speedup Graph Processing. In ISPDC , 2018. [40] Lin Li, Xianzhang Chen, Jiali Li, Jiapin Wang, Duo Liu, Yujuan Tan, and Ao Ren. Optimizing the Performance of NDP Operations by Retrieving File Semantics in Storage. In DAC , 2023. [41] Satanu Maity, Manojit Ghose, Avinash Kumar, Anol Chakraborty, and Ankit Chakraborty. Unguided Machine Learning-Based Computation Offloading for Near-Memory Processing. In VLSID , 2025. [42] Pierre Olivier, AKM Fazla Mehrab, Stefan Lankes, Mohamed Lamine Karaoui, Robert Lyerly, and Binoy Ravindran. HEXO: Offloading HPC Compute-Intensive Workloads on Low-Cost, Low-Power Embedded Systems. In HPDC , 2019. [43] Yizhou Wei, Minxuan Zhou, Sihang Liu, Korakit Seemakhupt, Tajana Rosing, and Samira Khan. PIMProf: An Automated Program Profiler for Processing-in-Memory Offloading Decisions. In DATE , 2022. [44] Johannes Weiner, Niket Agarwal, Dan Schatzberg, Leon Yang, Hao Wang, Blaise Sanouillet, Bikash Sharma, Tejun Heo, Mayank Jain, Chunqiang Tang, and Dim-itrios Skarlatos. TMO: Transparent Memory Offloading in Datacenters. In ASPLOS ,2022. [45] Zhe Yang, Youyou Lu, Xiaojian Liao, Youmin Chen, Junru Li, Siyu He, and Jiwu Shu. λ-IO: A Unified IO Stack for Computational Storage. In FAST , 2023. [46] Weiyi Sun, Mingyu Gao, Zhaoshi Li, Aoyang Zhang, Iris Ying Chou, Jianfeng Zhu, Shaojun Wei, and Leibo Liu. Lincoln: Real-Time 50-100B LLM Inference on Consumer Devices with LPDDR-Interfaced, Compute-Enabled Flash Memory. In 

HPCA , 2025. [47] Hongsun Jang, Siung Noh, Changmin Shin, Jaewon Jung, Jaeyong Song, and Jinho Lee. INFˆ 2: High-Throughput Generative Inference of Large Language Models using Near-Storage Processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09921 , 2025. [48] Xiurui Pan, Endian Li, Qiao Li, Shengwen Liang, Yizhou Shan, Ke Zhou, Yingwei Luo, Xiaolin Wang, and Jie Zhang. InstAttention: In-Storage Attention Offloading for Cost-Effective Long-Context LLM Inference. In HPCA , 2025. [49] Lokesh Jaliminche, Yangwook Kang, Changho Choi, Pankaj Mehra, and Heiner Litz. CS-Assist: A Tool to Assist Computational Storage Device Offload. NVMW ,2024. [50] Seokwon Kang, Jongbin Kim, Gyeongyong Lee, Jeongmyung Lee, Jiwon Seo, Hyungsoo Jung, Yong Ho Song, and Yongjun Park. ISP Agent: A Generalized In-storage-processing Workload Offloading Framework by Providing Multiple Op-timization Opportunities. ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization ,2024. [51] Sudharsan Seshadri, Mark Gahagan, Sundaram Bhaskaran, Trevor Bunker, Arup De, Yanqin Jin, Yang Liu, and Steven Swanson. Willow: A User-Programmable SSD. In USENIX OSDI , 2014. [52] Anurag Acharya, Mustafa Uysal, and Joel Saltz. Active Disks: Programming Model, Algorithms and Evaluation. In ASPLOS , 1998. [53] Mayank Kabra, Rakesh Nadig, Harshita Gupta, Rahul Bera, Manos Frouzakis, Vamanan Arulchelvan, Yu Liang, Haiyu Mao, Mohammad Sadrosadati, and Onur Mutlu. CIPHERMATCH: Accelerating Homomorphic Encryption-Based String Matching via Memory-Efficient Data Packing and In-Flash Processing. In ASPLOS ,2025. [54] Xiaohao Wang, Yifan Yuan, You Zhou, Chance C Coats, and Jian Huang. Project Almanac: A Time-Traveling Solid-State Drive. In EuroSys , 2019. [55] Shine Kim, Yunho Jin, Gina Sohn, Jonghyun Bae, Tae Jun Ham, and Jae W. Lee. Behemoth: A Flash-centric Training Accelerator for Extreme-scale DNNs. In FAST ,2021. [56] Yangwook Kang, Yang-Suk Kee, Ethan L. Miller, and Chanik Park. Enabling Cost-effective Data Processing with Smart SSD. In MSST , 2013. [57] Mahdi Torabzadehkashi, Siavash Rezaei, Ali Heydarigorji, Hosein Bobarshad, Vladimir Alves, and Nader Bagherzadeh. Catalina: In-Storage Processing Acceler-ation for Scalable Big Data Analytics. In PDP , 2019. [58] Kimberly Keeton, David A. Patterson, and Joseph M. Hellerstein. A Case for Intelligent Disks (IDISKs). SIGMOD Rec. , 1998. [59] Gunjae Koo, Kiran Kumar Matam, Te I, H. V. Krishna Giri Narra, Jing Li, Hung-Wei Tseng, Steven Swanson, and Murali Annavaram. Summarizer: Trading Communi-cation with Computing Near Storage. In MICRO , 2017. [60] Devesh Tiwari, Simona Boboila, Sudharshan Vazhkudai, Youngjae Kim, Xiaosong Ma, Peter Desnoyers, and Yan Solihin. Active Flash: Towards Energy-Efficient, In-Situ Data Analytics on Extreme-Scale Machines. In FAST , 2013. [61] Devesh Tiwari, Sudharshan S Vazhkudai, Youngjae Kim, Xiaosong Ma, Simona Boboila, and Peter J Desnoyers. Reducing Data Movement Costs Using Energy-Efficient, Active Computation on SSD. In HotPower , 2012. [62] Simona Boboila, Youngjae Kim, Sudharshan S. Vazhkudai, Peter Desnoyers, and Galen M. Shipman. Active Flash: Out-of-core Data Analytics on Flash Storage. In 

MSST , 2012. [63] Duck-Ho Bae, Jin-Hyung Kim, Sang-Wook Kim, Hyunok Oh, and Chanik Park. Intelligent SSD: A Turbo for Big Data Mining. In CIKM , 2013. [64] Mahdi Torabzadehkashi, Siavash Rezaei, Vladimir Alves, and Nader Bagherzadeh. CompStor: An In-Storage Computation Platform for Scalable Distributed Process-ing. In IPDPSW , 2018. [65] Shuyi Pei, Jing Yang, and Qing Yang. REGISTOR: A Platform for Unstructured Data Processing inside SSD Storage. ACM TOS , 2019. [66] Jaeyoung Do, Yang-Suk Kee, Jignesh M. Patel, Chanik Park, Kwanghyun Park, and David J. DeWitt. Query Processing on Smart SSDs: Opportunities and Challenges. In ACM SIGMOD , 2013. [67] Sungchan Kim, Hyunok Oh, Chanik Park, Sangyeun Cho, Sang-Won Lee, and Bongki Moon. In-Storage Processing of Database Scans and Joins. Information Sciences , 2016. [68] Erik Riedel, Christos Faloutsos, Garth A. Gibson, and David Nagle. Active Disks for Large-Scale Data Processing. Computer , 2001. [69] Erik Riedel, Garth Gibson, and Christos Faloutsos. Active Storage for Large-Scale Data Mining and Multimedia. In VLDB , 1998. [70] Shengwen Liang, Ying Wang, Youyou Lu, Zhe Yang, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. Cognitive SSD: A Deep Learning Engine for In-Storage Data Retrieval. In USENIX ATC , 2019. [71] Benjamin Y Cho, Won Seob Jeong, Doohwan Oh, and Won Woo Ro. XSD: Acceler-ating MapReduce by Harnessing the GPU inside an SSD . In WoNDP , 2013. [72] Sang-Woo Jun, Ming Liu, Sungjin Lee, Jamey Hicks, John Ankcorn, Myron King, Shuotao Xu, and Arvind. BlueDBM: An Appliance for Big Data Analytics. In ISCA ,2015. [73] Mohammadamin Ajdari, Pyeongsu Park, Joonsung Kim, Dongup Kwon, and Jang-woo Kim. CIDR: A Cost-effective In-line Data Reduction System for Terabit-per-second Scale SSD Arrays. In HPCA , 2019. [74] Sang-Woo Jun, Huy T Nguyen, Vijay Gadepally, et al. In-Storage Embedded Accelerator for Sparse Pattern Processing. In HPEC , 2016. [75] Myeonggu Kang, Hyeonuk Kim, Hyein Shin, Jaehyeong Sim, Kyeonghan Kim, and Lee-Sup Kim. S-FLASH: A NAND Flash-based Deep Neural Network Accelerator Exploiting Bit-Level Sparsity. IEEE TC , 2022. [76] Minsub Kim and Sungjin Lee. Reducing Tail Latency of DNN-based Recommender Systems using In-Storage Processing. In APSys , 2020. [77] Yunjae Lee, Jinha Chung, and Minsoo Rhu. SmartSAGE: Training Large-Scale Graph Neural Networks using In-Storage Processing Architectures. In ISCA , 2022. [78] Siqi Li, Fengbin Tu, Liu Liu, Jilan Lin, Zheng Wang, Yangwook Kang, Yufei Ding, and Yuan Xie. ECSSD: Hardware/Data Layout Co-Designed In-Storage-Computing Architecture for Extreme Classification. In ISCA , 2023. [79] Zhenyuan Ruan, Tong He, and Jason Cong. INSIDER: Designing In-Storage Computing System for Emerging High-Performance Drive. In USENIX ATC , 2019. [80] Jianguo Wang, Dongchul Park, Yannis Papakonstantinou, and Steven Swanson. SSD In-storage Computing for Search Engines. ToC , 2016. [81] Won Seob Jeong, Changmin Lee, Keunsoo Kim, Myung Kuk Yoon, Won Jeon, Myoungsoo Jung, and Won Woo Ro. REACT: Scalable and High-performance Regular Expression Pattern Matching Accelerator for In-storage Processing. IEEE TPDS , 2019. [82] Yandong Mao, Eddie Kohler, and Robert Tappan Morris. Cache Craftiness for Fast Multicore Key-Value Storage. In EuroSys , 2012. [83] Donghyun Gouk, Miryeong Kwon, Hanyeoreum Bae, and Myoungsoo Jung. Dock-erSSD: Containerized In-Storage Processing and Hardware Acceleration for Com-putational SSDs. In HPCA , 2024. [84] Leonid Yavits, Roman Kaplan, and Ran Ginosar. GIRAF: General Purpose In-Storage Resistive Associative Framework. IEEE TPDS , 2021. [85] Junkyum Kim, Myeonggu Kang, Yunki Han, Yang-gon Kim, and Lee-Sup Kim. OptimStore: In-Storage Optimization of Large Scale DNNs with On-Die Processing. In HPCA , 2023. [86] Minje Lim, Jeeyoon Jung, and Dongkun Shin. LSM-Tree Compaction Acceleration Using In-Storage Processing. In ICCE-Asia , 2021. [87] Sai Narasimhamurthy, Nikita Danilov, Sining Wu, Ganesan Umanesan, Stefano Markidis, Sergio Rivas-Gomez, Ivy Bo Peng, Erwin Laure, Dirk Pleiter, and Shaun De Witt. SAGE: Percipient Storage for Exascale Data Centric Computing. Parallel Computing , 2019. [88] Sang-Woo Jun, Andy Wright, Sizhuo Zhang, Shuotao Xu, and Arvind. GraFBoost: Using Accelerated Flash Storage for External Graph Analytics. In ISCA , 2018. [89] Dina Fakhry, Mohamed Abdelsalam, M Watheq El-Kharashi, and Mona Safar. A Review on Computational Storage Devices and Near Memory Computing for High-Performance Applications. J. Memori , 2023. [90] Insoon Jo, Duck-Ho Bae, Andre S. Yoon, Jeong-Uk Kang, Sangyeun Cho, Daniel D. G. Lee, and Jaeheon Jeong. YourSQL: A High-Performance Database System Leveraging In-storage Computing. PVLDB , 2016. [91] Kangqi Chen, Rakesh Nadig, Manos Frouzakis, Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Yu Liang, Haiyu Mao, Jisung Park, Mohammad Sadrosadati, and Onur Mutlu. REIS: A High-Performance and Energy-Efficient Retrieval System with In-Storage Processing. In ISCA , 2025. [92] Cangyuan Li, Ying Wang, Cheng Liu, Shengwen Liang, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. GLIST: Towards In-Storage Graph Learning. In USENIX ATC , 2021. [93] Jianguo Wang, Dongchul Park, Yang-Suk Kee, Yannis Papakonstantinou, and Steven Swanson. SSD In-Storage Computing for List Intersection. In DaMoN , 2016. [94] Rohan Mahapatra, Harsha Santhanam, Christopher Priebe, Hanyang Xu, and Hadi Esmaeilzadeh. In-storage acceleration of retrieval augmented generation as a service. In ISCA , 2025. [95] Yuyue Wang, Xiurui Pan, Yuda An, Jie Zhang, and Glenn Reinman. Beacon-

15 GNN: Large-Scale GNN Acceleration with Out-of-Order Streaming In-Storage Computing. In HPCA , 2024. [96] Zhongkai Yu, Shengwen Liang, Tianyun Ma, Yunke Cai, Ziyuan Nan, Di Huang, Xinkai Song, Yifan Hao, Jie Zhang, Tian Zhi, Yongwei Zhao, Zidong Du, Xing Hu, Qi Guo, and Tianshi Chen. Cambricon-LLM: A Chiplet-Based Hybrid Architecture for On-Device Inference of 70B LLM. In MICRO , 2024. [97] Jian Chen, Congming Gao, Youyou Lu, Yuhao Zhang, and Jiwu Shu. Ares-Flash: Efficient Parallel Integer Arithmetic Operations Using NAND Flash Memory. In 

MICRO , 2024. [98] Hyunjin Kim, Seunghwan Song, Sukhyun Choi, Jeongin Choe, Sanghyeok Han, Jisung Park, Jinho Lee, and Jae-Joon Kim. CrossBit: Bitwise Computing in NAND Flash Memory with Inter-Bitline Data Communication. In MICRO , 2025. [99] Ryan Wong, Nikita Kim, Kevin Higgs, Sapan Agarwal, Engin Ipek, Saugata Ghose, and Ben Feinberg. TCAM-SSD: A Framework for Search-Based Computing in Solid-State Drives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06938 , 2024. [100] Ryan Wong, Nikita Kim, Aniket Das, Kevin Higgs, Engin Ipek, Sapan Agarwal, Saugata Ghose, and Ben Feinberg. Anvil: An In-Storage Accelerator for Name-Value Data Stores. In ISCA , 2025. [101] Yun-Chih Chen, Yuan-Hao Chang, and Tei-Wei Kuo. Search-in-Memory (SiM): Conducting Data-Bound Computations on Flash Chip for Enhanced Efficiency. In 

DATE , 2024. [102] Won Ho Choi, Pi-Feng Chiu, Wen Ma, Gertjan Hemink, Tung Thanh Hoang, Martin Lueker-Boden, and Zvonimir Bandic. An In-flash Binary Neural Network Accelerator with SLC NAND Flash Array. In ISCAS , 2020. [103] Myoungjun Chun, Jaeyong Lee, Sanggu Lee, Myungsuk Kim, and Jihong Kim. PiF: In-Flash Acceleration for Data-Intensive Applications. In HotStorage , 2022. [104] Jaeyong Lee, Hyeunjoo Kim, Sanghun Oh, Myoungjun Chun, Myungsuk Kim, and Jihong Kim. Aif: Accelerating on-device llm inference using in-flash processing. In ISCA , 2025. [105] Panni Wang, Feng Xu, Bo Wang, Bin Gao, Huaqiang Wu, He Qian, and Shimeng Yu. Three-Dimensional NAND Flash for Vector–Matrix Multiplication. IEEE TVLSI ,2018. [106] Nika Mansouri Ghiasi and Onur Mutlu. Enabling fast, efficient, and low-cost genomic and metagenomic analyses via storage-centric system designs. In ICS Workshops , 2026. [107] Samsung. Samsung SSD 980 PRO. https://www.samsung.com/semiconductor/ minisite/ssd/product/consumer/980pro/ .[108] ADATA. ADATA Ultimate Series: SU630. https://www.adata.com/en/ consumer/category/ssds/591/ .[109] Intel. Intel SSD 660p Series, https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ products/docs/memory-storage/solid-state-drives/consumer-ssds/ 660p-series-brief.html .[110] Intel. Intel SSD D3-S4510 Series, https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/ en/products/memory-storage/solid-state-drives/data-center-ssds/ d3-series/d3-s4510-series/d3-s4510-1-92tb-2-5inch-3d2.html .[111] Intel. Intel SSD DC P4610 Series. https://ark. intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/products/140103/ intel-ssd-dc-p4610-series-1-6tb-2-5in-pcie-3-1-x4-3d2-tlc.html .[112] Rakesh Nadig, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Haiyu Mao, Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Arash Tavakkol, Jisung Park, Hamid Sarbazi-Azad, Juan Gómez-Luna, and Onur Mutlu. Venice: Improving Solid-State Drive Parallelism at Low Cost via Conflict-Free Accesses. In ISCA , 2023. [113] Rino Micheloni, Luca Crippa, and Alessia Marelli. Inside NAND Flash Memories .Springer, 2010. [114] Rino Micheloni, Alessia Marelli, and Kam Eshghi. Inside Solid State Drives (SSDs) .Springer, 2013. [115] Intel. Intel Optane SSD DC P4801X Series, https:// ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/products/149365/ intel-optane-ssd-dc-p4801x-series-100gb-2-5in-pcie-x4-3d-xpoint. html .[116] Samsung. Samsung SSD 960 PRO NVMe M.2 512GB, https://www. samsung.com/us/computing/memory-storage/solid-state-drives/ ssd-960-pro-m-2-512gb-mz-v6p512bw .[117] Samsung. Ultra-Low Latency with Samsung Z-NAND SSD, https: //www.samsung.com/semiconductor/global.semi.static/Ultra-Low_ Latency_with_Samsung_Z-NAND_SSD-0.pdf .[118] Melina Soysal, Konstantina Koliogeorgi, Can Firtina, Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Rakesh Nadig, Haiyu Mao, Geraldo F. Oliveira, Yu Liang, Klea Zambaku, Mohammad Sadrosadati, and Onur Mutlu. MARS: Processing-In-Memory Acceleration of Raw Signal Genome Analysis Inside the Storage Subsystem. In ICS , 2025. [119] Kiran K. Matam, Gunjae Koo, Haipeng Zha, Hung-Wei Tseng, and Murali An-navaram. GraphSSD: Graph Semantics Aware SSD. In ISCA , 2019. [120] Shengwen Liang, Ying Wang, Ziming Yuan, Cheng Liu, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. VStore: In-Storage Graph-Based Vector Search Accelerator. In DAC , 2022. [121] Carl Duffy, Jaehoon Shim, Sang-Hoon Kim, and Jin-Soo Kim. Dotori: A Key-Value SSD Based KV Store. Proc. VLDB Endowment , 2023. [122] Chanyoung Park, Jungho Lee, Chun-Yi Liu, Kyungtae Kang, Mahmut T. Kandemir, and Wonil Choi. AnyKey: A Key-Value SSD for All Workload Types. In ASPLOS ,2025. [123] Tim Bisson, Ke Chen, Changho Choi, Vijay Balakrishnan, and Yang-Suk Kee. Crail-KV: A High-Performance Distributed Key-Value Store Leveraging Native KV-SSDs over NVMe-oF. In IPCCC , 2018. [124] Rakesh Nadig, Vamanan Arulchelvan, Mayank Kabra, Harshita Gupta, Rahul Bera, Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Nanditha Rao, Qingcai Jiang, Andreas Kosmas Kakolyris, Yu Liang, Mohammad Sadrosadati, and Onur Mutlu. Conduit: Programmer-Transparent Near-Data Processing Using Multiple Compute-Capable Resources in Solid State Drives. In HPCA , 2026. [125] Onur Mutlu, Ataberk Olgun, Geraldo F Oliveira, and Ismail E Yuksel. Memory-Centric Computing: Recent Advances in Processing-in-DRAM. In IEDM , 2024. [126] Onur Mutlu, Ataberk Olgun, and İsmail Emir Yüksel. Memory-Centric Computing: Solving Computing’s Memory Problem. In IMW , 2025. [127] Arash Tavakkol, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Saugata Ghose, Jeremie Kim, Yixin Luo, Yaohua Wang, Nika Mansouri Ghiasi, Lois Orosa, Juan Gómez-Luna, and Onur Mutlu. FLIN: Enabling Fairness and Enhancing Performance in Modern NVMe Solid State Drives. In ISCA , 2018. [128] Jian Huang, Anirudh Badam, Laura Caulfield, Suman Nath, Sudipta Sengupta, Bikash Sharma, and Moinuddin K. Qureshi. FlashBlox: Achieving Both Perfor-mance Isolation and Uniform Lifetime for Virtualized SSDs. In FAST , 2017. [129] Miryeong Kwon, Donghyun Gouk, Changrim Lee, Byounggeun Kim, Jooyoung Hwang, and Myoungsoo Jung. DC-Store: Eliminating Noisy Neighbor Containers Using Deterministic I/O Performance and Resource Isolation. In FAST , 2020. [130] Donghyun Min and Youngjae Kim. Isolating Namespace and Performance in Key-Value SSDs for Multi-Tenant Environments. In HotStorage , 2021. [131] Donghyun Min, Kihyun Kim, Chaewon Moon, Awais Khan, Seungjin Lee, Changh-wan Yun, Woosuk Chung, and Youngjae Kim. A Multi-Tenant Key-Value SSD with Secondary Index for Search Query Processing and Analysis. TECS , 2023. [132] Jaeho Kim, Donghee Lee, and Sam H. Noh. Towards SLO Complying SSDs Through OPS Isolation. In FAST , 2015. [133] Lokesh N. Jaliminche, Chandranil Nil Chakraborttii, Changho Choi, and Heiner Litz. Enabling Multi-Tenancy on SSDs with accurate IO interference modeling. In 

SoCC , 2023. [134] Javier González and Matias Bjørling. Multi-Tenant I/O Isolation with Open-Channel SSDs. In NVMW , 2017. [135] Jinghan Sun, Benjamin Reidys, Daixuan Li, Jichuan Chang, Marc Snir, and Jian Huang. FleetIO: Managing Multi-Tenant Cloud Storage with Multi-Agent Rein-forcement Learning. In ASPLOS , 2025. [136] NVM Express. NVMe Namespaces, 2022. [137] NVM Express. NVM Express® Base Specification (Revision 2.3). NVM Express Specification, 2025. Includes updates for Endurance Group Management, Zoned Namespaces, and more. [138] Aayush Gupta, Youngjae Kim, and Bhuvan Urgaonkar. DFTL: A flash translation layer employing demand-based selective caching of page-level address mappings. In ASPLOS , 2009. [139] Nitin Agrawal, Vijayan Prabhakaran, Ted Wobber, John D. Davis, Mark S. Manasse, and Rina Panigrahy. Design Tradeoffs for SSD Performance. In USENIX ATC , 2008. [140] Wei Xie and Yong Chen. An Adaptive Separation-Aware FTL for Improving the Efficiency of Garbage Collection in SSDs. In CCGRID , 2014. [141] Myoungsoo Jung, Ramya Prabhakar, and Mahmut Taylan Kandemir. Taking Garbage Collection Overheads Off the Critical Path in SSDs. In Middleware , 2012. [142] Narges Shahidi, Mahmut T. Kandemir, Mohammad Arjomand, Chita R. Das, My-oungsoo Jung, and Anand Sivasubramaniam. Exploring the Potentials of Parallel Garbage Collection in SSDs for Enterprise Storage Systems. In SC , 2016. [143] Suzhen Wu, Yanping Lin, Bo Mao, and Hong Jiang. GCaR: Garbage Collection aware Cache Management with Improved Performance for Flash-based SSDs. In 

ICS , 2016. [144] Wonil Choi, Myoungsoo Jung, Mahmut Kandemir, and Chita Das. Parallelizing Garbage Collection with I/O to Improve Flash Resource Utilization. In HPDC , 2018. [145] Li-Pin Chang. On Efficient Wear Leveling for Large-Scale Flash-Memory Storage Systems. In SAC , 2007. [146] Ming-Chang Yang, Yu-Ming Chang, Che-Wei Tsao, Po-Chun Huang, Yuan-Hao Chang, and Tei-Wei Kuo. Garbage Collection and Wear Leveling for Flash Memory: Past and Future. In SMARTCOMP , 2014. [147] CRZ Technology. DaisyPlus OpenSSD Platform. https://github.com/ CRZ-Technology/OpenSSD-OpenChannelSSD , 2022. Accessed 2026. [148] Arash Tavakkol, Juan Gómez-Luna, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Saugata Ghose, and Onur Mutlu. MQSim: A framework for enabling realistic studies of modern multi-queue SSD devices. In FAST , 2018. [149] Mai Zheng, Joseph Tucek, Feng Qin, and Mark Lillibridge. Understanding the Robustness of SSDs under Power Fault. In FAST , 2013. [150] Huaicheng Li, Mingzhe Hao, Michael Hao Tong, Swaminathan Sundararaman, Matias Bjorling, and Haryadi S. Gunawi. The CASE of FEMU: Cheap, accurate, scalable and extensible flash emulator. In FAST , 2018. [151] Sang-Hoon Kim, Jaehoon Shim, Euidong Lee, Seongyeop Jeong, Ilkueon Kang, and Jin-Soo Kim. NVMeVirt: A Versatile Software-Defined Virtual NVMe Device. In 

FAST , 2023. [152] Jaewook Kwak, Sangjin Lee, Kibin Park, Jinwoo Jeong, and Yong Ho Song. Cosmos+ OpenSSD: Rapid Prototype for Flash Storage Systems. TOS , 2020. [153] Yun-Sheng Chang, Yao Hsiao, Tzu-Chi Lin, Che-Wei Tsao, Chun-Feng Wu, Yuan-Hao Chang, Hsiang-Shang Ko, and Yu-Fang Chen. Determinizing Crash Behavior with a Verified Snapshot-Consistent Flash Translation Layer. In OSDI , 2020. [154] Stefan Bodenmüller, Gerhard Schellhorn, Martin Bitterlich, and Wolfgang Reif. Flashix: Modular Verification of A Concurrent and Crash-Safe Flash File System. In Logic, Computation and Rigorous Methods , 2021. [155] Lei Qiao, Shaofeng Li, Hua Yang, and Mengfei Yang. A Formal Modeling and Verification Framework for Flash Translation Layer Algorithms. In SETTA , 2019. [156] Jesung Kim, Jong Min Kim, Sam H. Noh, Sang Lyul Min, and Yookun Cho. A 

16 Space-Efficient Flash Translation Layer for CompactFlash Systems. IEEE-TCE ,2002. [157] The Rocq Development Team. The Coq Proof Assistant Reference Manual, Version 8.20 . Inria, 2024. [158] Feng Chen, Tian Luo, and Xiaodong Zhang. CAFTL: A Content-Aware Flash Translation Layer Enhancing the Lifespan of Flash Memory based Solid State Drives. In FAST , 2011. [159] Rakesh Nadig, Vamanan Arulchelvan, Rahul Bera, Taha Shahroodi, Gagandeep Singh, Andreas Kosmas Kakolyris, İsmail Emir Yüksel, Mohammad Sadrosadati, Jisung Park, and Onur Mutlu. Harmonia: Enhancing Data Placement and Migration in Hybrid Storage Systems via Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. In ICS , 2026. [160] Kam Eshghi and Rino Micheloni. SSD Architecture and PCI Express Interface. In 

Inside Solid State Drives (SSDs) . Springer, 2013. [161] Peter Onufryk. NVMe® 2.0 Specifications: The Next Generation of NVMe Tech-nology. In SNIA-SDC 2021 , 2021. [162] ARM Holdings. Cortex-R4. https://developer.arm.com/Processors/ Cortex-R4 , 2011. [163] Chanik Park, Prakash Talawar, Daeski Won, Myung Jin Jung, Jung Been Im, Suksan Kim, and Youngjoon Choi. A High Performance Controller for NAND Flash-based Solid State Disk (NSSD). In NVSMW , 2006. [164] Kwanhu Bang, Sang-Hoon Park, Minje Jun, and Eui-Young Chung. A Memory Hierarchy-Aware Metadata Management Technique for Solid State Disks. In 

MWSCAS , 2011. [165] Yu Cai, Erich F. Haratsch, Onur Mutlu, and Ken Mai. Error Patterns in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Measurement, Characterization, and Analysis. In DATE , 2012. [166] Yu Cai, Gulay Yalcin, Onur Mutlu, Erich F. Haratsch, Adrian Cristal, Osman S. Un-sal, and Ken Mai. Flash Correct-and-Refresh: Retention-Aware Error Management for Increased Flash Memory Lifetime. In ICCD , 2012. [167] Yu Cai, Gulay Yalcin, Onur Mutlu, Erich F. Haratsch, Adrian Cristal, Osman S. Unsal, and Ken Mai. Error Analysis and Retention-Aware Error Management for NAND Flash Memory. Intel Tech. J. , 2013. [168] Yu Cai, Gulay Yalcin, Onur Mutlu, Erich F. Haratsch, Osman S. Unsal, Adrián Cristal, and Ken Mai. Neighbor-cell Assisted Error Correction for MLC NAND Flash Memories. In SIGMETRICS , 2014. [169] Yu Cai, Yixin Luo, Saugata Ghose, and Onur Mutlu. Read Disturb Errors in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization, Mitigation, and Recovery. In DSN , 2015. [170] Yu Cai, Saugata Ghose, Yixin Luo, Ken Mai, Onur Mutlu, and Erich F. Haratsch. Vul-nerabilities in MLC NAND Flash Memory Programming: Experimental Analysis, Exploits, and Mitigation Techniques. In HPCA , 2017. [171] Yixin Luo, Saugata Ghose, Yu Cai, Erich F. Haratsch, and Onur Mutlu. Improving 3D NAND Flash Memory Lifetime by Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation. In SIGMETRICS , 2018. [172] Yu Cai, Saugata Ghose, Erich F. Haratsch, Yixin Luo, and Onur Mutlu. Relia-bility Issues in Flash-memory-based Solid-state Drives: Experimental Analysis, Mitigation, Recovery. In Inside Solid State Drives , 2018. [173] Yu Cai, Onur Mutlu, Erich F. Haratsch, and Ken Mai. Program Interference in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization, Modeling, and Mitigation. In ICCD , 2013. [174] Yu Cai, Yixin Luo, Erich F. Haratsch, Ken Mai, and Onur Mutlu. Data Retention in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization, Optimization, and Recovery. In 

HPCA , 2015. [175] Yu Cai, Saugata Ghose, Erich F. Haratsch, Yixin Luo, and Onur Mutlu. Error Characterization, Mitigation, and Recovery in Flash-Memory-based Solid-State Drives. Proceedings of the IEEE , 2017. [176] Yixin Luo, Yu Cai, Saugata Ghose, Jongmoo Choi, and Onur Mutlu. WARM: Improving NAND Flash Memory Lifetime with Write-hotness Aware Retention Management. In MSST , 2015. [177] Yixin Luo, Saugata Ghose, Yu Cai, Erich F. Haratsch, and Onur Mutlu. Enabling Accurate and Practical Online Flash Channel Modeling for Modern MLC NAND Flash Memory. JSAC , 2016. [178] Yixin Luo, Saugata Ghose, Yu Cai, Erich F. Haratsch, and Onur Mutlu. HeatWatch: Improving 3D NAND Flash Memory Device Reliability by Exploiting Self-Recovery and Temperature Awareness. In HPCA , 2018. [179] Jisung Park, Myungsuk Kim, Myoungjun Chun, Lois Orosa, Jihong Kim, and Onur Mutlu. Reducing Solid-State Drive Read Latency by Optimizing Read-Retry. In 

ASPLOS , 2021. [180] ONFI Workgroup. Open NAND Flash Interface Specification, Revision 5.1. https: //onfi.org , 2022. [181] Laura M. Grupp, Adrian M. Caulfield, Joel Coburn, Steven Swanson, Eitan Yaakobi, Paul H. Siegel, and Jack K. Wolf. Characterizing Flash Memory: Anomalies, Observations, and Applications. In MICRO , 2009. [182] Cagdas Dirik and Bruce Jacob. The Performance of PC Solid-State Disks (SSDs) as a Function of Bandwidth, Concurrency, Device Architecture, and System Organi-zation. In ISCA , 2009. [183] Ted Pekny, Luyen Vu, Jeff Tsai, Dheeraj Srinivasan, Erwin Yu, Jonathan Pabustan, Joe Xu, Srinivas Deshmukh, Kim-Fung Chan, Michael Piccardi, et al. A 1-Tb Density 4b/Cell 3D-NAND Flash on 176-Tier Technology with 4-Independent Planes for Read using CMOS-Under-the-Array. In ISSCC , 2022. [184] Wanik Cho, Jongseok Jung, Jongwoo Kim, Junghoon Ham, Sangkyu Lee, Yujong Noh, Dauni Kim, Wanseob Lee, Kayoung Cho, Kwanho Kim, et al. A 1-Tb, 4b/Cell, 176-Stacked-WL 3D-NAND Flash Memory with Improved Read Latency and a 14.8 Gb/mm 2 Density. In ISSCC , 2022. [185] Dongku Kang, Minsu Kim, Su Chang Jeon, Wontaeck Jung, Jooyong Park, Gyosoo Choo, Dong-kyo Shim, Anil Kavala, Seung-Bum Kim, Kyung-Min Kang, et al. A 512Gb 3-bit/Cell 3D 6th-Generation V-NAND Flash Memory with 82MB/s Write Throughput and 1.2Gb/s Interface. In ISSCC , 2019. [186] Hiroshi Maejima, Kazushige Kanda, Susumu Fujimura, Teruo Takagiwa, Susumu Ozawa, Jumpei Sato, Yoshihiko Shindo, Manabu Sato, Naoaki Kanagawa, Junji Musha, et al. A 512Gb 3b/Cell 3D Flash Memory on a 96-Word-Line-Layer Tech-nology. In ISSCC , 2018. [187] NVM Express. NVM Express® NVM Command Set Specification (Revision 1.2). 

> https://nvmexpress.org/specifications/

, 2025. Section 5.3, End-to-end Data Protection. [188] Eran Gal and Sivan Toledo. Algorithms and Data Structures for Flash Memories. 

ACM CSUR , 2005. [189] Sang-Hoon Park, Seung-Hwan Ha, Kwanhu Bang, and Eui-Young Chung. Design and Analysis of Flash Translation Layers for Multi-Channel NAND Flash-Based Storage Devices. IEEE-TCE , 2009. [190] Tae-Sun Chung, Dong-Joo Park, Sangwon Park, Dong-Ho Lee, Sang-Won Lee, and Ha-Joo Song. A Survey of Flash Translation Layer. JSA , 2009. [191] Garth Goodson and Rahul Iyer. Design Tradeoffs in a Flash Translation Layer. In 

WEST , 2010. [192] Eran Gal and Sivan Toledo. Mapping Structures for Flash Memories: Techniques and Open Problems. In SwSTE , 2005. [193] Dongzhe Ma, Jianhua Feng, and Guoliang Li. A Survey of Address Translation Technologies for Flash Memories. CSUR , 2014. [194] Jinghan Sun, Shaobo Li, Yunxin Sun, Chao Sun, Dejan Vucinic, and Jian Huang. LeaFTL: A Learning-Based Flash Translation Layer For Solid-State Drives. In 

ASPLOS , 2023. [195] Ivan Luiz Picoli. OX: Deconstructing the FTL for Computational Storage . Ph.D. thesis, IT University of Copenhagen, 2019. [196] Sang-Won Lee, Dong-Joo Park, Tae-Sun Chung, Dong-Ho Lee, Sangwon Park, and Ha-Joo Song. A Log Buffer-Based Flash Translation Layer Using Fully-Associative Sector Translation. TECS , 2007. [197] Dongzhe Ma, Jianhua Feng, and Guoliang Li. LazyFTL: A Page-level Flash Trans-lation Layer Optimized for NAND Flash Memory. In SIGMOD , 2011. [198] You Zhou, Fei Wu, Ping Huang, Xubin He, Changsheng Xie, and Jian Zhou. An Efficient Page-level FTL to Optimize Address Translation in Flash Memory. In 

EuroSys , 2015. [199] Sang-Phil Lim, Sang-Won Lee, and Bongki Moon. FASTer FTL for Enterprise-Class Flash Memory SSDs. In SNAPI , 2010. [200] Ji-Yong Shin, Zeng-Lin Xia, Ning-Yi Xu, Rui Gao, Xiong-Fei Cai, Seungryoul Maeng, and Feng-Hsiung Hsu. FTL Design Exploration in Reconfigurable High-Performance SSD for Server Applications. In ICS , 2009. [201] Shengzhe Wang, Zihang Lin, Suzhen Wu, Hong Jiang, Jie Zhang, and Bo Mao. LearnedFTL: A Learning-Based Page-Level FTL for Reducing Double Reads in Flash-Based SSDs. In HPCA , 2024. [202] Dongchul Park, Jianguo Wang, and Yang-Suk Kee. In-storage Computing for Hadoop MapReduce Framework: Challenges and Possibilities. ToC , 2016. [203] Vikram Sharma Mailthody, Zaid Qureshi, Weixin Liang, Ziyan Feng, Simon Gar-cia de Gonzalo, Youjie Li, Hubertus Franke, Jinjun Xiong, Jian Huang, and Wen-mei Hwu. DeepStore: In-Storage Acceleration for Intelligent Queries. In MICRO , 2019. [204] Luyi Kang, Yuqi Xue, Weiwei Jia, Xiaohao Wang, Jongryool Kim, Changhwan Youn, Myeong Joon Kang, Hyung Jin Lim, Bruce Jacob, and Jian Huang. Iceclave: A Trusted Execution Environment For In-Storage Computing. In MICRO , 2021. [205] Feng Chen, Rubao Lee, and Xiaodong Zhang. Essential Roles of Exploiting In-ternal Parallelism of Flash Memory-Based Solid State Drives in High-Speed Data Processing. In HPCA , 2011. [206] Yang Hu, Hong Jiang, Dan Feng, Lei Tian, Hao Luo, and Shuping Zhang. Perfor-mance Impact and Interplay of SSD Parallelism Through Advanced Commands, Allocation Strategy and Data Granularity. In ICS , 2011. [207] Yang Hu, Hong Jiang, Dan Feng, Lei Tian, Hao Luo, and Chao Ren. Exploring and Exploiting the Multilevel Parallelism Inside SSDs For Improved Performance and Endurance. ToC , 2013. [208] Jiho Kim, Seokwon Kang, Yongjun Park, and John Kim. Networked SSD: Flash Memory Interconnection Network for High-Bandwidth SSD. In MICRO , 2022. [209] Matias Bjørling, Javier González, and Philippe Bonnet. LightNVM: The Linux Open-Channel SSD Subsystem. In FAST , 2017. [210] Ivan Luiz Picoli, Niclas Hedam, Philippe Bonnet, and Pinar Tözün. Open-Channel SSD (What Is It Good For). In CIDR , 2020. [211] NVM Express. NVMe Zoned Namespace SSDs & the Zoned Storage Linux Software Ecosystem, 2020. [212] Yanqin Jin, Hung-Wei Tseng, Yannis Papakonstantinou, and Steven Swanson. KAML: A Flexible, High-Performance Key-Value SSD. In HPCA , 2017. [213] Hongsun Jang, Jaeyong Song, Jaewon Jung, Jaeyoung Park, Youngsok Kim, and Jinho Lee. Smart-Infinity: Fast Large Language Model Training Using Near-Storage Processing on A Real System. In HPCA , 2024. [214] Sudipto Das, Vivek R. Narasayya, Feng Li, and Manoj Syamala. CPU Sharing Techniques for Performance Isolation in Multi-Tenant Relational Database-as-a-Service. PVLDB , 2013. [215] Haitao Wang, Zhanhuai Li, Xiao Zhang, Xiaonan Zhao, Xingsheng Zhao, Weijun Li, and Song Jiang. OC-Cache: An Open-channel SSD Based Cache for Multi-Tenant Systems. In IPCCC , 2018. [216] Tian Luo, Siyuan Ma, Rubao Lee, Xiaodong Zhang, Deng Liu, and Li Zhou. S-Cave: Effective SSD Caching to Improve Virtual Machine Storage Performance. In PACT ,2013. [217] Renping Liu, Duo Liu, Xianzhang Chen, Yujuan Tan, Runyu Zhang, and Liang 

17 Liang. Self-Adapting Channel Allocation for Multiple Tenants Sharing SSD Devices. 

TCAD , 2022. [218] Trusted Computing Group. TCG Storage Security Subsystem Class (SSC): Key Per I/O, Version 1.00, Revision 1.41. https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/ resource/tcg-storage-security-subsystem-class-ssc-key-per-i-o/ ,2023. [219] Bryan S. Kim. Utilitarian Performance Isolation in Shared SSDs. In HotStorage 18 ,2018. [220] Jonas Zaddach, Anil Kurmus, Davide Balzarotti, Erik-Oliver Blass, Aurélien Fran-cillon, Travis Goodspeed, Moitrayee Gupta, and Ioannis Koltsidas. Implementation and Implications of a Stealth Hard-Drive Backdoor. In ACSAC , 2013. [221] Carlo Meijer and Bernard Van Gastel. Self-Encrypting Deception: Weaknesses in the Encryption of Solid State Drives. In S&P , 2019. [222] Rick Wertenbroek and Alberto Dassatti. Pandora’s Box in Your SSD: The Untold Dangers of NVMe. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00439 , 2024. [223] Myungsuk Kim, Jisung Park, Genhee Cho, Yoona Kim, Lois Orosa, Onur Mutlu, and Jihong Kim. Evanesco: Architectural Support for Efficient Data Sanitization in Modern Flash-Based Storage Systems. In ASPLOS , 2020. [224] Jonas Juffinger, Fabian Rauscher, Giuseppe La Manna, and Daniel Gruss. Secret Spilling Drive: Leaking User Behavior through SSD Contention. In NDSS , 2025. [225] Jonas Juffinger, Hannes Weissteiner, Thomas Steinbauer, and Daniel Gruss. The HMB Timing Side Channel: Exploiting the SSD’s Host Memory Buffer. In DIMVA ,2025. [226] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Secure Hash Standard (SHS). FIPS PUB 180-4, 2015. [227] Sidney Amani, Alex Hixon, Zilin Chen, Christine Rizkallah, Peter Chubb, Liam O’Connor, Joel Beeren, Yutaka Nagashima, Japheth Lim, Thomas Sewell, Joseph Tuong, Gabriele Keller, Toby Murray, Gerwin Klein, and Gernot Heiser. Cogent: Verifying High-Assurance File System Implementations. In ASPLOS , 2016. [228] Shivani Tripathy, Debiprasanna Sahoo, Manoranjan Satpathy, and Madhu Mutyam. Formal Modeling and Verification of Security Properties of a Ransomware-Resistant SSD. IEEE TCAD , 2023. [229] Gérard Huet, Gilles Kahn, and Christine Paulin-Mohring. The Coq Proof Assistant: A Tutorial. Technical report, INRIA, 1997. [230] Adam Chlipala. Certified Programming with Dependent Types: A Pragmatic Intro-duction to the Coq Proof Assistant . MIT Press, 2013. [231] Andreas Schierl, Gerhard Schellhorn, Dominik Haneberg, and Wolfgang Reif. Abstract Specification of the UBIFS File System for Flash Memory. In FM , 2009. [232] Gerhard Schellhorn, Gidon Ernst, Jörg Pfähler, Dominik Haneberg, and Wolfgang Reif. Development of a Verified Flash File System. In ABZ , 2014. [233] Gidon Ernst, Jörg Pfähler, Gerhard Schellhorn, and Wolfgang Reif. Inside a Verified Flash File System: Transactions and Garbage Collection. In VSTTE , 2015. [234] Wolfgang Reif, Gerhard Schellhorn, and Kurt Stenzel. Interactive Correctness Proofs for Software Modules Using KIV. In COMPASS , 1995. [235] Rajeev Joshi and Gerard J. Holzmann. A Mini Challenge: Build a Verifiable Filesystem. FAC , 19(2), 2007. [236] Andrew Butterfield, Leo Freitas, and Jim Woodcock. Mechanising a Formal Model of Flash Memory. SCP , 74(4), 2009. [237] Eunsuk Kang and Daniel Jackson. Formal Modeling and Analysis of a Flash Filesystem in Alloy. In ABZ , 2008. [238] Kriangsak Damchoom and Michael J. Butler. Applying Event and Machine De-composition to a Flash-Based Filestore in Event-B. In SBMF , 2009. [239] Paul Taverne and Cornelis Pronk. RAFFS: Model Checking a Robust Abstract Flash File Store. In ICFEM , 2009. [240] Jörg Pfähler, Gidon Ernst, Gerhard Schellhorn, Dominik Haneberg, and Wolfgang Reif. Formal Specification of an Erase Block Management Layer for Flash Memory. In HVC , 2013. [241] Moonzoo Kim, Yunja Choi, Yunho Kim, and Hotae Kim. Formal Verification of a Flash Memory Device Driver: An Experience Report. In SPIN , 2008. [242] Shivani Tripathy, Debiprasanna Sahoo, Manoranjan Satpathy, and Srinivas Pinisetty. Formal Modeling and Verification of NAND Flash Memory Supporting Advanced Operations. In ICCD , 2019. [243] Vijayan Prabhakaran, Thomas L. Rodeheffer, and Lidong Zhou. Transactional Flash. In OSDI , 2008. [244] Tej Chajed, Joseph Tassarotti, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Argosy: Verifying Layered Storage Systems with Recovery Refinement. In PLDI , 2019. [245] Tej Chajed, Joseph Tassarotti, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Verify-ing Concurrent, Crash-Safe Systems with Perennial. In SOSP , 2019. [246] Tej Chajed, Joseph Tassarotti, Mark Theng, Ralf Jung, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. GoJournal: A Verified, Concurrent, Crash-Safe Journaling System. In OSDI , 2021. [247] Travis Hance, Andrea Lattuada, Chris Hawblitzel, Jon Howell, Rob Johnson, and Bryan Parno. Storage Systems are Distributed Systems (So Verify Them That Way!). In OSDI , 2020. [248] Haogang Chen, Daniel Ziegler, Tej Chajed, Adam Chlipala, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Using Crash Hoare logic for certifying the FSCQ file system. In SOSP , 2015. [249] Haogang Chen, Tej Chajed, Alex Konradi, Stephanie Wang, Atálay Íleri, Adam Chli-pala, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Verifying a High-Performance Crash-Safe File System Using a Tree Specification. In SOSP , 2017. [250] Helgi Sigurbjarnarson, James Bornholt, Emina Torlak, and Xi Wang. Push-Button Verification of File Systems via Crash Refinement. In OSDI , 2016. [251] Atalay Mert Ileri, Tej Chajed, Adam Chlipala, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Proving Confidentiality in a File System Using DiskSec. In OSDI , 2018. [252] Gerwin Klein, Kevin Elphinstone, Gernot Heiser, June Andronick, David Cock, Philip Derrin, Dhammika Elkaduwe, Kai Engelhardt, Rafal Kolanski, Michael Nor-rish, Thomas Sewell, Harvey Tuch, and Simon Winwood. seL4: Formal verification of an OS kernel. In SOSP , 2009. [253] Toby Murray, Daniel Matichuk, Matthew Brassil, Peter Gammie, Timothy Bourke, Sean Seefried, Corey Lewis, Xin Gao, and Gerwin Klein. seL4: From general purpose to a proof of information flow enforcement. In IEEE S&P , 2013. [254] Ronghui Gu, Zhong Shao, Hao Chen, Xiongnan (Newman) Wu, Jieung Kim, Vil-helm Sjöberg, and David Costanzo. CertiKOS: An Extensible Architecture for Building Certified Concurrent OS Kernels. In OSDI , 2016. [255] Xavier Leroy. Formal Verification of a Realistic Compiler. CACM , 2009. [256] Joseph A. Goguen and José Meseguer. Security Policies and Security Models. In 

IEEE S&P , 1982. [257] NIST. Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). Technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2001. [258] Seock-Hwan Noh, Hoyeon Lee, Junkyum Kim, Junsu Im, Jay H. Park, Sungjin Lee, Sam H. Noh, Yeseong Kim, and Jaeha Kung. FlashVault: Versatile In-NAND Self-Encryption with Zero Area Overhead. arXiv:2508.03866v1 , 2025. [259] Jian Huang, Jun Xu, Xinyu Xing, Peng Liu, and Moinuddin K. Qureshi. FlashGuard: Leveraging Intrinsic Flash Properties to Defend Against Encryption Ransomware. In CCS , 2017. [260] SungHa Baek, Youngdon Jung, Aziz Mohaisen, Sungjin Lee, and DaeHun Nyang. SSD-Insider: Internal Defense of Solid-State Drive against Ransomware with Perfect Data Recovery. In ICDCS , 2018. [261] Md Hafizul Islam Chowdhuryy, Myoungsoo Jung, Fan Yao, and Amro Awad. D-Shield: Enabling Processor-side Encryption and Integrity Verification for Secure NVMe Drives. In HPCA , 2023. [262] Jinwoo Ahn, Seungjin Lee, Jinhoon Lee, Yungwoo Ko, Donghyun Min, Junghee Lee, and Youngjae Kim. SGX-SSD: A Policy-based Versioning SSD with Intel SGX. In HotStorage , 2020. 

18