Title: HiFuzz: Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Semantic-Aware and Adaptive CPU Fuzzing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.06619v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 00:04:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# HiFuzz: Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Semantic-Aware and Adaptive CPU Fuzzing 

Ya Wang ∗, Hanwei Fan ∗, Zhenguo Liu †, Xiaofeng Zhou ∗, Yangdi Lyu †, Jiang Xu †, and Wei Zhang ∗∗Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong Email: {ywangmu, hfanah, xzhoubu }@connect.ust.hk, wei.zhang@ust.hk 

> †

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China Email: zliu094@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, {yangdilyu, jiang.xu }@hkust-gz.edu.cn 

Abstract —Modern processor verification struggles to reach deep architectural states due to the inefficiencies of traditional mutation-based fuzzing. We propose HiFuzz, a novel hierarchical reinforcement learning framework that replaces mutation with a structured, two-layer generation process: a Program Agent for global layout and a Basic Block Agent for precise instruc-tion filling. To overcome reward sparsity, HiFuzz integrates an adaptive coverage reward mechanism and a semantic-aware basic block encoder providing intrinsic feedback. Extensive evaluations on three real-world RISC-V cores demonstrate that HiFuzz significantly outperforms state-of-the-art fuzzers in coverage and bug detection. 

Index Terms —Hardware Fuzzing, Reinforcement Learning, RISC-V, Functional Verification 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

As the scaling benefits of Moore’s Law diminish, perfor-mance gains increasingly rely on complex microarchitectural techniques. The rapid proliferation of open ISAs, notably RISC-V, has amplified this complexity by fostering a diverse ecosystem of custom implementations and extensions. This evolution has triggered a combinatorial explosion in the de-sign state space and widened the verification gap. Functional verification has therefore become the dominant bottleneck in the hardware design flow, accounting for over 70% of the total research and development cycle. Residual hardware errata, including speculative execution flaws such as Meltdown [1] and Spectre [2], can compromise system security and require costly silicon respins. Traditional verification methodologies struggle to keep pace with this growth. Constrained-Random Verification [3] suffers from low efficiency and high manual overhead, while formal verification [4] is computationally intractable for full-scale designs due to state explosion. Hardware fuzzing has therefore emerged as a scalable alternative. Fig. 1 illustrates three hardware-fuzzing paradigms. Early fuzzers use mutation-based strategies [5, 6], which gener-ate tests by modifying existing templates. Mutation often disrupts instruction semantics, so many generated programs are discarded before they reach meaningful pipeline stages. Recent work moves toward constructive program genera-tion [7], which builds syntactically correct instruction streams from scratch to preserve execution validity. These methods, however, still rely mainly on randomized heuristics. Without 

Fig. 1: The paradigm shift in hardware fuzzing: mutation-based generation, random constructive generation, and Hi-Fuzz’s RL-guided generation with semantic feedback. learning from prior executions, they explore the state space blindly and struggle to reach deep architectural states. This gap suggests a role for reinforcement learning, or RL, which can optimize generation strategies from coverage feedback. Integrating RL into constructive generation is harder than applying it to mutation-based fuzzers. In mutation-based approaches, the agent selects a discrete operator for an existing seed, which is a direct control problem. Constructive genera-tion must instead assemble a program instruction by instruc-tion while respecting syntactic and semantic dependencies. This creates a control-validity dilemma : the generator must preserve structural integrity while still exposing an expressive action space to the RL agent. Naive RL applications fail because the search space is combinatorial and the validity constraints are rigid. To use RL for constructive hardware fuzzing, we identify three challenges:  

> •

Complex Action Space and Structural Dependencies: 

Unlike seed mutation, constructive generation operates at the level of basic blocks and instruction sequences. Each decision constrains the validity and feasibility of later instructions, so mapping this dependency-laden process into a learnable RL action space without violating pro-gram correctness remains an open challenge.  

> •

Sparse Feedback and Delayed Rewards: Coverage metrics are typically available only after full test program execution, resulting in severe reward sparsity. The agent 1arXiv:2607.06619v1 [cs.AR] 7 Jul 2026 must make many sequential decisions before receiving any feedback, and the long delay between action and reward complicates credit assignment.  

> •

Reward Bias and Masking Effect: Optimizing a single aggregated coverage metric often produces a masking effect. The agent can maximize total reward by over-exploiting easy modules while neglecting harder-to-reach components. Without balanced exploration, the policy converges on local optima and misses critical states. To tackle these challenges, we propose HiFuzz . HiFuzz addresses Challenge 1 through a hierarchical decomposition of the generation process, Challenge 2 through a Semantic-Aware Basic Block Encoder that provides intrinsic novelty rewards, and Challenge 3 through an Adaptive Coverage Reward Mechanism based on the Upper Confidence Bound algorithm. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:  

> •

A Configurable Test Generation Framework: We in-troduce a hierarchical test generation framework that integrates global configurability with basic block-level control. This design systematically constructs valid test cases with complex data and control-flow dependencies, exception handling, and privilege transitions. The gener-ator serves as the foundation for the RL components.  

> •

A Dual-Agent RL Architecture: We design a hier-archical RL system comprising a Rainbow DQN-based Program Agent for high-level structural configuration and a PPO-based Basic Block Agent for precise instruction generation.  

> •

Semantic-Aware Intrinsic Feedback: We introduce a Semantic-Aware Basic Block Encoder trained via anovel two-stage pipeline: self-supervised masked lan-guage modeling followed by supervised contrastive learn-ing with a custom BB similarity metric. The resulting embedding space quantifies the novelty of generated basic blocks, providing immediate intrinsic rewards without hardware simulation.  

> •

Adaptive Coverage Reward Mechanism: We develop a UCB-based reward mechanism to mitigate coverage bias and the masking effect. By decomposing coverage at the module level and dynamically weighting each module’s contribution, this mechanism ensures balanced exploration across all hardware components.  

> •

Comprehensive Evaluation: Experiments on three industry-standard RISC-V cores, Rocket, BOOM, and CVA6, show that HiFuzz substantially outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in both coverage convergence and bug detection. II. B ACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 

A. Hardware Fuzzing 

Hardware fuzzing explores processor states by generating test programs and checking their behavior against a reference model. Early frameworks such as RFUZZ [5], and later Difuz-zRTL [6] and TheHuzz, use coverage-guided mutation . Each test is produced by mutating a seed at the instruction level and then keeping inputs that improve coverage. Blind mutation often breaks the semantic validity of long RISC-V programs. Cascade [7] reports that DifuzzRTL’s stream has a median completion rate of only 1.7% and a prevalence of 3.0%, so most instructions never reach the back end. ProcessorFuzz [8] augments DifuzzRTL with CSR-transition filtering, but the underlying feedback remains tied to control-register activity. Frequently updated counters such as instret and fflags 

can dominate this signal, causing the fuzzer to revisit anarrow subset of register states rather than explore broader architectural behavior. Mutation-based loops therefore trade off validity against feedback fidelity and tend to stall on both. Generation-based fuzzers reduce this validity problem. Cas-cade [7] uses an asymmetric ISA pre-simulation step to synthe-size valid instruction streams from scratch while interleaving control- and data-flow construction. Its generation, however, is driven by random heuristics and does not learn from past runs. ChatFuzz [9] and GenHuzz [10] inject reinforcement learning into the loop, but they emit a flat token sequence without explicit program structure. This leaves three limitations: the policy is optimized against a specific DUT’s coverage coun-ters, recovery from stalled exploration relies on global policy resets, and token-level generation can still emit programs that fail after compilation. A more detailed structural contrast with GenHuzz is deferred to Sec. V-B5. These observations motivate two design goals: a reward signal grounded in program semantics rather than a single coverage counter, and an exploration mechanism that redirects effort toward under-verified components without discarding the learned policy. 

B. Chisel-Based CPU Design 

Chisel is a Scala-embedded hardware construction language that describes circuits as parameterized generators rather than fixed RTL instances [11]. This high-level representation is widely used in the RISC-V ecosystem. Rocket [12] and BOOM [13] are both Chisel-based cores. The value of a high-level hardware representation is not limited to design productivity. It can also serve verification infrastructure. Laeufer et al. [14] show that coverage metrics such as line, toggle, and finite-state-machine coverage can be implemented as compiler instrumentation passes over FIR-RTL, decoupling coverage collection from a specific simulator backend. This observation is important for hardware fuzzing because feedback quality depends on what the instrumentation can expose. HiFuzz uses such high-level coverage structure when it is available on Chisel-generated cores, but the method does not rely on Chisel itself. The CVA6 evaluation uses an independent SystemVerilog design to test whether the generation policy transfers beyond the Rocket Chip ecosystem. 

C. Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning 

Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning decomposes a com-plex decision-making problem into subtasks solved at different temporal or semantic scales [15]. This structure fits construc-tive program generation, where decisions range from global 2Fig. 2: HiFuzz framework overview. The dual-agent architecture collaboratively generates test programs: (1) Program Agent determines global configuration; (2) Basic Block Agent fills instruction sequences; (3) Semantic-Aware BB Encoder provides intrinsic rewards; (4) Adaptive Coverage Reward Mechanism balances module-level exploration. memory layout to individual instruction selection. HiFuzz uses a two-level hierarchy. A high-level Program Agent determines the global structure and configuration of the test program, while a low-level Basic Block Agent generates instruction se-quences. This decomposition reduces the action space seen by each agent and enables more efficient learning and exploration than a flat RL policy. III. F RAMEWORK 

A. Overview 

As shown in Fig. 2, HiFuzz uses a dual-agent architecture together with two feedback mechanisms. The Program Agent 

acts as the high-level planner, determining global properties such as memory layout, the number of basic blocks (BBs), and the control-flow structure of each test program. The 

Basic Block Agent functions as the low-level executor, filling each BB with valid instruction sequences according to the configuration handed down by the Program Agent. Two feedback signals close the loop. The Semantic-Aware Basic Block Encoder (Section III-D) returns an immediate intrinsic novelty reward after each BB is produced, so the Basic Block Agent receives a dense learning signal without waiting for RTL simulation. The Adaptive Coverage Reward Mechanism (Section III-E) consumes post-simulation cover-age and dynamically rebalances module-level weights so that hard-to-reach components do not get starved by easier ones. 

B. Configurable Test Generator 

The foundation of HiFuzz is a highly configurable test generator capable of producing syntactically and semantically valid RISC-V programs. Building upon the principles of constructive generation, our generator introduces a hierarchi-cal configuration mechanism that separates global structural decisions from local instruction details. Figure 3 summarizes the generation workflow. Given a 

Global Config , HiFuzz first fixes the macro structure of the program: total memory budget, BB count, BB-size distribu-tion, and the control-flow template that links the BBs. It then allocates aligned, non-overlapping code and data regions and assigns each BB concrete start, end, and successor addresses consistent with that global layout. For each BB, the corre-sponding BB Level Config specifies the target instruction-category mix (integer, floating-point, memory, CSR, etc.) together with the termination mode (branch, jump, or ex-ception); the constrained generator then instantiates concrete instructions while enforcing operand dependencies, privilege constraints, address legality, and jump-target consistency. The final program is accepted only after whole-program validation confirms that every transfer target stays within allocated re-gions and every memory access remains in bounds, after which the executable test is sent to the ISA pre-simulator and RTL run-time environment. This hierarchical split between global structure and per-BB content lets HiFuzz explore the structural space of programs systematically while retaining the fine-grained control needed to trigger specific micro-architectural behaviors. 

C. HRL Agent Architecture 

HiFuzz employs a two-level hierarchical RL architecture (Fig. 4) that decomposes the complex program-generation task into two decoupled subproblems. The high-level Program 3Fig. 3: Hierarchical Configuration mechanism Agent determines the global structure of the test program, while the low-level Basic Block Agent decides the instructions inside each BB. This decomposition is motivated by the fact that program-level decisions (memory layout, BB count, control flow) operate on a fundamentally different timescale and abstraction level from instruction-level decisions (operand selection, dependency management, BB termination), so as-signing them to a single flat policy would mix signals that benefit from very different learning dynamics. The two agents interact through a shared environment: the Program Agent’s macro action defines the context in which the Basic Block Agent operates, while the Basic Block Agent’s micro actions produce the concrete test programs whose coverage outcomes, in turn, drive the learning signals of both agents. 

Fig. 4: HRL Agent Interaction (Temporal Workflow). The Program Agent selects global config at macro step T ; the Basic Block Agent fills each BB at micro steps t = 1 , . . . , N .Intrinsic reward Rint flows from BB Encoder to BB Agent; extrinsic reward Rext flows from CPM to Program Agent at 

T + 1 .

1) Program Agent: The Program Agent acts as a struc-tural configuration scheduler : at the start of each episode it picks a global layout for the test program, including memory footprint, BB count, per-BB length distribution, and privilege mix, without ever choosing individual instructions. Its input is a compact 11-dimensional summary of recent generation statistics (BB/instruction completion rates, BB-size moments, and training progress), and its output is one of 1,375 discrete configurations formed by the cross-product of memory, count, length, and distribution levels. We use Rainbow DQN [16] for this role because its prioritized replay and n-step returns are well matched to a discrete action space with delayed, sparse coverage rewards. Exact state fields and action levels are tabulated in Appendix A. 

2) Basic Block Agent: The Basic Block Agent is trained with Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [17] under amulti-head Actor-Critic architecture: the Actor emits the BB-level configuration (instruction-type distribution and BB-termination signal), while the Critic carries separate value heads for intrinsic and extrinsic returns so that reward streams of different scales and variances are not collapsed into a single target. Letting the agent choose concrete instructions directly would expose it to a combinatorial action space whose size grows with both BB length and ISA breadth, which is impractical for any on-policy RL algorithm. We therefore have the agent output only a compact set of category-level distribution parameters and delegate syntactic and semantic correctness to the Cascade-based constrained generator; this abstraction keeps the policy tractable while still giving it enough control to shape the instruction mix and termination of each BB. To counter the sparsity of the extrinsic coverage reward, we complement it with an intrinsic novelty signal inspired by Random Network Distillation (RND) [18]. Unlike vanilla RND, which measures novelty as the prediction error of a fixed 

random target network, our formulation replaces the random projection with the Semantic-Aware Basic Block Encoder (Section III-D), so novelty is computed on learned, micro-architecture-aware features rather than arbitrary random ones. 

Reward Design. The intrinsic reward Rint is obtained by cluster-distance novelty on the frozen BB Encoder embed-dings: 

Rint = min 

> k

 1 − cos( E(bb ), C k), (1) where E(bb ) is the L2-normalized embedding of the generated BB and {Ck} are online-updated cluster centers. The extrinsic reward Rext is derived from coverage improvement normalized against a dynamic baseline: 

Rext = ∆cov − baseline baseline , baseline = ¯Rbuffer · γ, (2) with ¯Rbuffer the mean of recent rewards and γ ∈ (0 , 1) adiminishing factor. 

Loss Functions. The agent is trained with the PPO clipped-surrogate objective [17]; our design contribution is a dual-advantage actor loss that keeps the two reward streams sepa-rated all the way through learning: 

Lactor = αint ˆAint + αext ˆAext , (3) where ˆAint and ˆAext are Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) [19] estimates from the two critic heads and αint , α ext 

4weight the two streams. The total objective augments Lactor 

with the per-head critic MSE losses and an entropy bonus: 

L = Lactor + X

> k∈{ int ,ext }

MSE  Vk(st), y k

 − β H  π(·| st), (4) where yint and yext are the discounted returns for each stream and β controls exploration. 

D. Semantic-Aware Basic Block Encoder 

Instruction-level RL suffers from a fundamental feedback problem: meaningful coverage is only available after the entire 

program has been generated and simulated on the DUT, which leaves each intra-BB decision without a local training signal. To break this dependency, we introduce a Semantic-Aware Basic Block Encoder that quantifies the novelty of a generated BB directly in an ISA semantic space, without RTL simulation. The encoder is deliberately designed to be DUT-agnostic, so the same trained model can be deployed across Rocket, BOOM, and CVA6 without retraining. The encoder has three components: (i) a structured tok-enizer that converts RISC-V instructions into semantically tagged token sequences, (ii) a Bi-LSTM encoder backbone that produces fixed-dimensional embeddings, and (iii) a two-stage training pipeline that first learns assembly syntax via self-supervised pre-training and then aligns embeddings with a micro-architecture-aware similarity metric. During fuzzing, the frozen encoder drives an online cluster-distance novelty estimator whose output is the intrinsic reward Rint used by the Basic Block Agent (Eq. 1). 

1) Structured RISC-V Tokenizer: Raw assembly text is a poor input for a learned encoder because treating each instruc-tion as an opaque string discards operand roles, execution-unit metadata, and register structure, which help distinguish micro-architectural behaviors. Our tokenizer (Fig. 5) instead decomposes every instruction into semantic sub-tokens that expose (i) operand roles (destination, source, memory address, CSR, immediate), (ii) the target execution unit annotated per opcode (such as INT_ALU , LOAD , STORE , BRANCH ,

FPU ), and (iii) symbolic names for control-status registers (such as 0x300 →mstatus ). Special markers ( <s> /</s> ,

<dsts> /<srcs> , <mem> , <csr> , <const> ) delimit these fields. < s >  lw  < dst >  x1  ; < src >  <mem>  <const>  ; x2             

> < s > add < dst > x3 < src > <const> x1
> < s > csrrw < dst > x4 < csr > mstatus < src > x5
> ;
> ;
> ;
> ;

Advanced RISC-V Tokenizer  

> Execution Unit Metadata CSR Mapping

Fig. 5: Structured RISC-V tokenizer. Each instruction is de-composed into semantic sub-tokens that expose operand roles, execution-unit metadata, and symbolic CSR names. This design yields two concrete advantages over the token-level scheme used by GenHuzz [10], which treats each in-struction as a whitespace-separated bag of word-level tokens. First, exposing operand roles and execution-unit metadata lets the encoder learn hardware-aware relations between instructions—e.g., that two opcodes dispatching to the same functional unit are closer in the embedding space—rather than relying purely on statistical co-occurrence. Second, our vocabulary collapses to only 343 tokens while still covering 100% of the RISC-V G ISA, which keeps the embedding table small and stabilizes training of the downstream encoder. 

2) Encoder Architecture: We adopt a bidirectional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) as the encoder backbone. The choice is motivated by a structural match between the inductive bias of the model and the object being encoded: a basic block is a short, strictly ordered, single-entry single-exit instruction sequence whose semantics are dominated by local data and control depen-dencies, whereas attention-based models are built to amortize parameters over long-range context that a BB simply does not contain. Under our two-stage, train-from-scratch regime this mismatch also has a practical cost—Transformer- and linear-attention-based backbones pay for capacity we do not use and are harder to optimize on a moderate-sized corpus without large-scale pretraining, while a Bi-LSTM converges more stably on the same data. To confirm that no strong candidate is being left on the table, we benchmarked two additional families of sequence models—Transformer-based (GPT-2, GPT-2-small) and linear-attention (RWKV-7)—and report the full size/latency comparison in Appendix B. 

3) Two-Stage Training Process: We employ a curriculum learning approach, moving from syntax and grammar learning to similarity discrimination. Fig. 6 illustrates the complete training pipeline. Input Basic Block 

> Token Masking
> Instruction Masking
> BB Encoder
> Model Backbone
> Input BB_1
> Input BB_2
> BB Encoder
> Model Backbone
> Token-level
> Prediction Head
> Instr-level
> Prediction Head
> Token
> prediction loss
> Instruction
> prediction loss
> Total MLM Loss
> Custom Similarity
> Calculation
> Embedding_1
> Embedding_2
> Cosine Similarity
> Similarity Score
> MSE Loss
> Stage 1: Masked Language Modeling (MLM)
> Stage 2: Similarity Alignment Learning

Fig. 6: Two-stage training pipeline for the BB Encoder. 

Stage 1: Self-Supervised Syntax Learning (MLM). 

Stage 1 teaches the encoder the syntax and structural patterns of RISC-V assembly from 50 K+ unlabeled samples, without manual annotations. We use a dual-level masking strategy: 

token-level masking randomly masks 15% of individual tokens (operands, registers) so the model learns local usage patterns, while instruction-level masking masks entire instructions so the model learns sequential dependencies across instructions. This self-supervised objective lets the encoder internalize RISC-V semantics before any task-specific fine-tuning. 5Stage 2: Supervised Similarity Learning. Stage 2 aligns the embedding space with a micro-architecture-aware similar-ity metric. In software testing, functional equivalence (identi-cal input/output mappings) provides natural similarity labels: for example, different compiler optimizations of the same source program are still “similar” despite differing instruc-tion sequences. In hardware fuzzing, however, functionally equivalent programs may stress entirely different internal CPU components; for example, unoptimized memory accesses and optimized register-only operations can exercise different execution units and dependency hazards. To bridge this gap, we define a custom structural similarity metric, BB-Sim (Algorithm 1), that draws on the weighted sequence-alignment intuition used in binary-difference work such as BinSequence [20], but extends it with hardware-specific features: instruction-type overlap, operand register reuse patterns, and data-dependency structure. This metric provides supervision for training the encoder to distinguish in-struction sequences that stress different hardware components, even when they produce identical functional behavior. 

Algorithm 1 Basic Block Similarity Calculation (BB-Sim)                                                                  

> Input: Basic blocks A= ( a1, . . . , a n)and B= ( b1, . . . , b m)
> Output: Similarity score S
> // 1. Initialize DP table
> Initialize DP [0: n][0: m]←0
> // 2. Compute weighted sequence score
> for i←1to ndo for j←1to mdo
> s←MATCH SCORE (ai, b j)
> sdiag ←DP [i−1, j −1] + sDP [i, j ]←max {DP [i−1, j ], DP [i, j −1] , s diag }
> end end
> Sseq ←DP [n, m ]
> // 3. Add dependency bonus
> P←BACKTRACK PAIRS (DP, A, B )
> Sdep ←0
> foreach (i, j )∈Pdo
> Sdep ←Sdep +DEP BONUS (ai, b j, W )
> end
> // 4. Normalize
> return (Sseq +Sdep )/max( n, m )

Algorithm 1 keeps the full computation path while ab-breviating only the low-level scoring rules. Specifically, MATCH SCORE (ai, b j ) first assigns Bexact to an exact opcode match, or a discounted α · Bexact when the two instruc-tions target the same execution unit; it then adds Bsameop 

for each operand position whose type matches. The helper DEP BONUS (ai, b j , W ) contributes βbonus when the aligned instruction pair exhibits consistent dependency behavior within window W . This preserves the weighted sequence-alignment intuition while keeping the pseudocode compact enough for the main text. In Stage 2, we employ contrastive learning where the cosine similarity of the generated embeddings approximates this cus-tom similarity score S. The encoder is trained to minimize the MSE loss: L = (cos( E(BB 1), E (BB 2)) −S)2. By forcing the network to predict this micro-architecturally grounded metric, the resulting semantic embedding space inherently reflects hardware stress patterns. Consequently, vector closeness in this space directly corresponds to structural and hardware-utilization similarity, providing the intrinsic reward signal for the RL agent. 

E. Adaptive Coverage Reward Mechanism 

When the agent is optimized against a single global cov-erage metric, easily covered modules tend to dominate the reward signal, mask the starvation of harder-to-reach compo-nents, and drive the policy toward local optima. HiFuzz ad-dresses this with a module-aware Adaptive Coverage Reward Mechanism (ACRM) based on the Upper Confidence Bound algorithm [21]: coverage is decomposed at the module level and each module’s contribution is reweighted dynamically so that exploration stays balanced across the entire design. 

1) Module Breakdown Strategy: Instead of optimizing a single global coverage number, we slice the DUT into M in-dependent sub-modules and aggregate coverage metrics (Line, Toggle, MUX, Control Register) at the granularity of each module (e.g., core.div, dcache, fpuOpt, ptw). Let Cov (t) 

> i

denote the coverage of module i ∈ {1, . . . , M } at step t. This allows us to track the verification status of each component independently and ensure balanced exploration. 

2) Dynamic Weighting with UCB: We formulate the mod-ule selection as a Multi-Armed Bandit problem. The weight 

w(t) 

> i

for module i at step t is calculated dynamically using a UCB-based approach: 

˜w(t) 

> i

= μ(t) 

> i

+ β(t) · v(t) 

> i

(5) 

w(t) 

> i

= exp( ˜ w(t) 

> i

/τ )

PMj=1 exp( ˜ w(t) 

> j

/τ ) (6) where:  

> •

μ(t) 

> i

is the historical mean coverage gain for module i

(Exploitation).  

> •

v(t) 

> i

= 1 − current cov (t) 

> i
> max cov i

represents the saturation level of the module (Exploration).  

> •

β(t) is a dynamic parameter that grows as training pro-gresses, shifting focus from exploiting high-yield mod-ules to exploring under-verified ones.  

> •

τ is a temperature parameter for softmax normalization. The final extrinsic reward R(t) 

> ext

passed to the Program Agent is a weighted sum of coverage gains across all modules: 

R(t) 

> ext

=

> M

X

> i=1

w(t) 

> i

· ∆Cov (t) 

> i

(7) This mechanism ensures that the fuzzer continuously shifts its focus to under-covered modules, preventing local optima. IV. I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

HiFuzz is implemented in Python on top of Cocotb, Ver-ilator [22], and Spike, and is evaluated on Rocket [12], BOOM [13], and CVA6 [23]. The Program Agent is trained with Rainbow DQN [16] over an 11-dimensional generation-statistics state and a 1,375 -way discrete configuration action; 6the Basic Block Agent is trained with PPO [17] on top of a multi-head Actor–Critic, using intrinsic/extrinsic reward coefficients αint =1 , αext =2 and extrinsic-baseline diminishing factor γ=0 .75 . Both agents are narrow MLPs trained with learning rates 1e −4 and 1e −3, respectively, on an Intel Xeon Gold 6246R server with one NVIDIA A100 GPU. Full state/action schemas, per-layer network sizes, remaining PPO hyperparameters, coverage-instrumentation primitives, and the YAML-driven experiment configuration are listed in Appendix A. V. C OMPREHENSIVE EVALUATION 

This section evaluates the performance of HiFuzz on real-world RISC-V processors. We first detail the evaluation setup, followed by experiments assessing coverage efficiency, abla-tion studies, program generation quality, BB Encoder effec-tiveness, and bug detection capability. 

A. Experimental Setup 

All fuzzing sessions run for 24 hours per DUT on the hardware and with the hyperparameters listed in Section IV. 

1) DUT Processors: We evaluate three open-source RISC-V cores: Rocket Core [12], an in-order Chisel core; BOOM Core [13], an out-of-order Chisel core; and CVA6 [23], a six-stage SystemVerilog core with a separate fpnew FPU. Our experiments target the enabled RISC-V G-subset instructions used by these configurations. CVA6 is independent from the Rocket Chip ecosystem in both HDL and microarchitecture, so it serves as a cross-DUT check rather than another Rocket-family configuration. The reference model for all three cores is Spike. 

2) Baselines and Metrics: We compare HiFuzz against three state-of-the-art CPU fuzzers: DifuzzRTL [6], Proces-sorFuzz [8], and Cascade [7]. The coverage metrics used in our evaluation are summarized in Table I. Ablation variants disable the Adaptive Coverage Reward Mechanism (ACRM) or the BB Encoder to isolate each component. TABLE I: Coverage metrics used in the evaluation.        

> Metric Meaning
> Line Executed RTL statements. Toggle Signal value transitions ( 0↔1). MUX [5] Multiplexer-select toggles. Control Register [6] Exploration of control-register states.

These metrics should be interpreted as complementary sig-nals rather than interchangeable scores. Line and Toggle cov-erage indicate broad RTL activity and are useful sanity checks, but they can saturate even when architecturally interesting states remain unexplored. MUX and Control Register cov-erage are closer to processor-verification intent because they expose exercised control paths, CSR states, and module-level selection behavior. Consequently, a modest Line/Toggle gain can still be meaningful when accompanied by larger Control Register, MUX, or bug-detection gains; the latter indicate that generated programs are reaching verification-relevant corner cases instead of merely executing more statements. Unless otherwise stated, each coverage curve reports one full 24-hour end-to-end campaign under a fixed wall-clock budget. We use identical per-fuzzer CPU-core budgets and include generation, RL inference/update, RTL simulation, and coverage collection in the reported time. The Gen. Time col-umn in Table II isolates the time spent outside RTL simulation and coverage collection; the remaining budget is dominated by simulation and coverage processing. The BB Encoder is trained offline once in our workflow and reused across DUTs, so its training cost is not charged to the 24-hour fuzzing budget. 

B. Coverage Efficiency 0 5 10 15 20     

> Runtime (hours)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Control Register Coverage  1e6 HiFuzz (Ours) Cascade DifuzzRTL ProcessorFuzz

Fig. 7: 24-hour Control Register Coverage growth on Rocket Core: HiFuzz vs. Cascade, DifuzzRTL, and ProcessorFuzz. 

1) Control Register Coverage: We use Control Register Coverage as the primary efficiency metric on Rocket because all three baselines and HiFuzz are evaluated on the same control-register coverage objective. This keeps the comparison focused on generation quality rather than on differences in the reported metric. TABLE II: 24-hour Control Register Coverage on Rocket Core.                          

> Method Cov. Tests Gen. Time Cov. /Test
> DifuzzRTL [6] 133,971 17,025 1.98h (8.3%) 7.87 ProcessorFuzz [8] 103,941 26,633 12.60h (52.5%) 3.90 Cascade [7] 740,329 21,439 1.06h (4.4%) 34.53 DQN+PPO 777,916 14,885 3.38h (14.1%) 52.26
> HiFuzz (Ours) 1,102,343 9,454 7.32h (30.5%) 116.60

Fig. 7 shows that the mutation-based baselines plateau early on Rocket, while Cascade improves faster at first but flattens later. HiFuzz reaches higher final coverage under the same 24-hour budget. Table II shows the same trend in aggregate: compared with Cascade, HiFuzz improves Control Register Coverage by 48.9% and raises coverage per test by 3.3 ×.The gain comes from more effective generated programs, not from a larger test volume. 

2) Cross-DUT Coverage Efficiency on CVA6: We also test HiFuzz on CVA6 , a SystemVerilog DUT outside the Rocket-family implementation stack. Since CVA6 is not written in Chisel, it cannot use the same instrumentation path that we use 7to collect Control Register Coverage on Rocket. We therefore compare 24-hour Total Coverage , computed as the sum of Verilator Line and Toggle coverage, against Cascade in Fig. 8. Under the same time budget, HiFuzz reaches 55,241 coverage points, a 7.2% gain over Cascade’s 51,541, supporting the generality of the method beyond Rocket-specific RTL structure and instrumentation. 0 5 10 15 20 

> Runtime (hours)
> 48000
> 50000
> 52000
> 54000
> Total Coverage
> HiFuzz (Ours)
> Cascade

Fig. 8: 24-hour Total Coverage growth on the SystemVerilog-based CVA6 core: HiFuzz (Ours) vs. Cascade. 

3) Module-Level Coverage Breakdown: We next inspect module-level coverage to understand how ACRM changes the search behavior. Fig. 9 reports per-module coverage together with the learned module weights. Coverage  dcache fpuOpt                 

> Weight Coverage  core.csr core_self
> Weight Coverage  core.div frontend
> 0246810 12
> Weight
> 0246810 12
> Runtime (hours)
> HiFuzz DifuzzRTL ACRM Weight

Fig. 9: Per-module Control-Register Coverage growth (top) and ACRM weight dynamics (bottom) on six Rocket modules. HiFuzz gains coverage on hard-to-reach modules such as 

fpuOpt , while ACRM lowers the weight of easier modules after saturation. The largest gains appear in hard-to-reach modules such as the FPU. As easier modules saturate, the UCB term lowers their reward weight and shifts attention toward under-covered modules instead of letting them be hidden by aggregate cov-erage. This behavior reduces the masking effect that appears when a single global coverage score is optimized directly. TABLE III: Verilator-collected Line and Toggle coverage on Rocket (%). Bold : best. Underline: best baseline. 

Metric DifuzzRTL ProcFuzz Cascade HiFuzz 

Line 72.78 72.49 73.52 75.98 

Toggle 65.54 65.59 63.29 67.58 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900          

> 35
> 40
> 45 Rocket (2265 coverage points)
> Cascade
> Ours
> 01000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
> Time (seconds)
> 40
> 60
> 80 BOOM (7752 coverage points)
> Cascade
> Ours
> Coverage points (%)

Fig. 10: MUX coverage on Rocket and BOOM. HiFuzz’s advantage is small on Rocket but widens substantially on the more complex out-of-order BOOM core. 

4) MUX, Line, and Toggle Coverage: Fig. 10 shows a small MUX-coverage gap on Rocket and a wider gap on BOOM. Table III reports Line and Toggle coverage measured after generation on the same Rocket test cases. These metrics are not used as HiFuzz’s training objective, and they tend to saturate quickly on mid-complexity cores [5]; the modest gains are therefore expected. The more useful signal is that the advantage grows on the more complex out-of-order DUT. 

5) Structural Comparison with GenHuzz: GenHuzz [10] targets similar RISC-V cores, but its reported coverage uses a different simulation back-end (Synopsys VCS) and an un-released 12M-parameter model. We therefore avoid a direct coverage-to-coverage comparison in our Verilator-based flow. The structural contrast is still informative. GenHuzz emits a flat token stream bounded by a preset token budget, so inter-instruction structure must be learned implicitly from next-token statistics on a 5M-instruction random corpus. HiFuzz assigns program length and BB count to the Program Agent and leaves intra-BB instruction choice to the Basic Block Agent. In the program-quality analysis of Fig. 14, this design yields an average dependency-chain length of 18.5 and a prevalence of 96.7%. These are not raw coverage results, but they help explain why HiFuzz can generate denser and more structured tests. 

C. Ablation Study 

We isolate the BB Encoder and ACRM on Rocket. All variants are compared against a DQN+PPO baseline that keeps the dual-agent structure but removes both optimizations. Fig. 11 shows that the dual-agent baseline alone gives only a small gain over Cascade. Adding the BB Encoder supplies dense intrinsic feedback for instruction-level decisions, while ACRM redirects extrinsic reward toward under-covered mod-ules. The full system achieves a 51.87% improvement over the DQN+PPO baseline, which indicates that the two mechanisms address different parts of the reward problem. This ablation also clarifies what the experiment does and does not isolate. The DQN+PPO baseline keeps the Program 80 5 10 15 20 

> Runtime (hours)
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Coverage
> 1e6
> +52%
> +34%
> +44% Full
> w/o ACRM
> w/o BBEncoder
> Baseline

Fig. 11: Ablation on Rocket: 24-hour Control Register Cover-age growth curves. The BB Encoder contributes +34 .45% ,ACRM contributes +44 .15% , and the full HiFuzz system achieves +51 .87% over the DQN+PPO baseline. Agent/Basic Block Agent split but removes both semantic intrinsic feedback and adaptive module weighting; therefore, Fig. 11 primarily measures the incremental value of the two reward-shaping mechanisms within the same hierarchical gen-erator. A true single-agent instruction-level RL baseline would require a different action interface and validity mechanism, making it less controlled as a component ablation. We there-fore use the DQN+PPO variant to isolate the reward mecha-nisms, and use the program-quality analysis in Appendix C as supporting evidence that the hierarchical generator produces higher-prevalence programs with longer dependency chains than the non-learning and randomly constructive baselines. 

D. BB Encoder Performance 

We evaluate the Semantic-Aware Basic Block Encoder (Section III-D), instantiated as a Bi-LSTM with embedding dimension 96 and trained on 20 ,000 Cascade-generated pro-grams. Appendix B compares it with Transformer (GPT-2-style) and Linear-Attention (RWKV) alternatives. We measure whether embedding cosine similarity tracks the BB similarity score from Algorithm 1. Fig. 12 reports a Pearson correlation of 0.876 , which supports using the encoder as intrinsic feedback for the BB Agent. 

Fig. 12: Correlation between embedding cosine similarity and BB similarity score. Pearson r = 0 .876 .Fig. 13 further shows that both stages of the encoder curriculum converge smoothly, including masked language modeling in Stage 1 and similarity learning in Stage 2. 

E. Bug Discovery 

We use the Encarsia benchmark [24], which models CPU bugs as signal or logic-expression mix-ups and broken con-

Fig. 13: BB Encoder two-stage training loss. Stage 1: Masked Language Modeling. Stage 2: Similarity learning with weighted LCS metric. TABLE IV: Bug detection on the Encarsia benchmark [24]: #detected. Each DUT has 15 Mix-ups (“M”) and 15 Broken Conditionals (“C”); every fuzzer runs 24 h per bug. Bold : best. Underline: best non-HiFuzz baseline (unique). 

Rocket BOOM All Method M C Tot./30 M C Tot./30 /60 

DifuzzRTL [6] 5 5 10 9 6 15 25 ProcessorFuzz [8] 5 5 10 9 6 15 25 Cascade [7] 7 4 11 10 5 15 26 

HiFuzz (Ours) 7 5 12 12 6 18 30 

∆ vs. Cascade +0 +1 +1 +2 +1 +3 +4 

ditionals, then formally checks that each injected bug can produce an architectural deviation. From its EnCorpus set we run the 30 bugs per DUT (15 Mix-ups + 15 Broken Conditionals; IDs in Table VI of the Appendix), giving every fuzzer a 24-hour budget per bug on one CPU core. Table IV summarizes the outcome. On Rocket, all fuzzers remain within a narrow range. On BOOM, HiFuzz detects 

18/30 bugs, while every baseline detects 15. Across both DUTs, HiFuzz detects 30 bugs versus 26 for Cascade. Encarsia’s case studies show that missed bugs often require specific ISA features, CSR side-effect cases, targeted input values, or pressure on microarchitectural structures such as issue queues, buffers, and reorder buffers [24]. HiFuzz’s advantage on BOOM is consistent with this observation: its hierarchical policy generates broader ISA/CSR scenarios and more structured stress sequences than the baselines under the same time budget. Beyond Encarsia, we also ran a sanity-check campaign on CVA6 against previously reported real bugs from the literature. HiFuzz triggered the known CVA6 bugs covered by Cascade [7] and GenHuzz [10], which provides supporting evidence beyond injected-bug corpora. VI. L IMITATIONS 

HiFuzz is evaluated on open-source RISC-V cores of up to roughly one million gates, and its current implementation targets single-hart program generation without multi-hart syn-chronization or the A extension, so concurrency-heavy bug classes such as memory-ordering violations remain out of 9scope. The framework also assumes access to module-level coverage signals and incurs additional encoder/RL overhead relative to purely constructive fuzzers. Porting HiFuzz to another ISA requires replacing the ISA-specific parts of the Structured Tokenizer and constrained generator: opcode categories, operand roles, register classes, privilege/exception rules, and legal addressing forms. The BB-Sim idea is not tied to RISC-V, but mature ISAs such as ARM or x86 would need richer instruction metadata to handle variable-length encodings, complex addressing modes, implicit operands, flags, and instruction-specific side effects. Porting to a proprietary core also requires a reference model or checker and coverage access at a useful granularity. If only global coverage is available, ACRM can degrade to a global reward, but it loses its ability to redirect effort toward under-covered modules. Finally, because full 24-hour multi-fuzzer campaigns are expensive, the reported coverage curves are not averaged over many random seeds; broader multi-seed reporting with mean and standard deviation is useful future work for quantifying run-to-run variance. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We presented HiFuzz, a hierarchical RL framework for hardware fuzzing that pairs a macro-level Program Agent with a micro-level Basic Block Agent, driven by a Semantic-Aware BB Encoder for dense intrinsic feedback and an ACRM for balanced module-level coverage. Across three RISC-V cores, HiFuzz consistently outperforms state-of-the-art fuzzers in coverage efficiency and bug detection, with the advantage widening on more complex DUTs. REFERENCES 

[1] M. Lipp, M. Schwarz, D. Gruss, T. Prescher, W. Haas, A. Fogh, J. Horn, S. Mangard, P. Kocher, D. Genkin, Y. Yarom, and M. Hamburg, “Meltdown: Reading kernel memory from user space,” in 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18) , 2018, pp. 973–990. [2] P. Kocher, J. Horn, A. Fogh, D. Genkin, D. Gruss, W. Haas, M. Hamburg, M. Lipp, S. Mangard, T. Prescher, and Y. Yarom, “Spectre attacks: Exploiting speculative execution,” in 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P) , 2019, pp. 1–19. [3] J. Bergeron, Writing Testbenches: Functional Verification of HDL Models , 2nd ed. Springer, 2003. [4] E. M. Clarke, T. A. Henzinger, H. Veith, and R. Bloem, Eds., Handbook of Model Checking . Springer, 2018. [5] K. Laeufer, J. Koenig, D. Kim, J. Bachrach, and K. Sen, “Rfuzz: Coverage-directed fuzz testing of RTL on FP-GAs,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8. [6] J. Hur, S. Song, D. Kwon, E. Baek, J. Kim, and B. Lee, “Difuzzrtl: Differential fuzz testing to find cpu bugs,” in 

2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) .IEEE, 2021, pp. 1286–1303. [7] F. Solt, K. Ceesay-Seitz, and K. Razavi, “Cascade: CPU fuzzing via intricate program generation,” in 33rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 24) ,2024, pp. 5341–5358. [8] S. Canakci, C. Rajapaksha, L. Delshadtehrani, A. Nataraja, M. B. Taylor, M. Egele, and A. Joshi, “Processorfuzz: Processor fuzzing with control and status registers guidance,” in 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Hardware Oriented Security and Trust (HOST) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–12. [9] M. Rostami, M. Chilese, S. Zeitouni, R. Kande, J. Ra-jendran, and A. R. Sadeghi, “Beyond random inputs: A novel ml-based hardware fuzzing,” in 2024 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) , 2024, pp. 1–6. [10] L. Wu, M. Rostami, H. Li, J. Rajendran, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “ {GenHuzz }: An efficient generative hardware fuzzer,” in 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) , 2025, pp. 1787–1805. [11] J. Bachrach, H. Vo, B. Richards, Y. Lee, A. Waterman, R. Avizienis, J. Wawrzynek, and K. Asanovi´ c, “Chisel: Constructing hardware in a scala embedded language,” in DAC Design Automation Conference . IEEE, 2012, pp. 1212–1221. [12] K. Asanovi´ c et al. , “The Rocket chip generator,” Techni-cal Report UCB/EECS-2016-17, EECS Department, UC Berkeley , 2016. [13] C. Celio, D. A. Patterson, and K. Asanovi´ c, “BOOM: An open-source out-of-order risc-v core,” in First Work-shop on Computer Architecture Research with RISC-V (CARRV) , 2017. [14] K. Laeufer, V. Iyer, D. Biancolin, J. Bachrach, B. Nikoli´ c, and K. Sen, “Simulator independent coverage for RTL hardware languages,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3, 2023, pp. 606–617. [15] R. S. Sutton, D. Precup, and S. Singh, “Between MDPs and semi-MDPs: A framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning,” Artificial Intelligence , vol. 112, no. 1–2, pp. 181–211, 1999. [16] M. Hessel, J. Modayil, H. Van Hasselt, T. Schaul, G. Os-trovski, W. Dabney, D. Horgan, B. Piot, M. Azar, and D. Silver, “Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning,” in AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2018. [17] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [18] Y. Burda, H. Edwards, A. Storkey, and O. Klimov, “Ex-ploration by random network distillation,” International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2019. [19] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel, “High-dimensional continuous control us-ing generalized advantage estimation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438 , 2015. [20] H. Huang, A. M. Youssef, and M. Debbabi, “BinSe-quence: Fast, accurate and scalable binary code reuse 10 detection,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security (ASIA CCS) , 2017, pp. 155–166. [21] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer, “Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem,” Machine Learning , vol. 47, no. 2–3, pp. 235–256, 2002. [22] CHIPS Alliance under The Linux Foundation, “Verilator: The Fastest Verilog/SystemVerilog Simulator,” https:// github.com/verilator/verilator, 2024, (2024). [23] F. Zaruba and L. Benini, “The cost of application-class processing: Energy and performance analysis of a Linux-ready 1.7-GHz 64-bit RISC-V core in 22-nm FDSOI technology,” in IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems , vol. 27, no. 11. IEEE, 2019, pp. 2629–2640. [24] M. B¨ olcskei, F. Solt, K. Ceesay-Seitz, and K. Razavi, “Encarsia: Evaluating cpu fuzzers via automatic bug injection,” in 34th USENIX Security Symposium , 2025. APPENDIX AIMPLEMENTATION CONFIGURATION DETAILS 

This appendix complements Section IV with the full state/action schemas, network sizes, optimizer settings, and simulation-environment details used in all evaluations. 

State and Action Spaces. The Program Agent observes an 11-dimensional state SP that summarizes recent genera-tion behavior (BB completion statistics, BB quality metrics, and exploration progress) and emits a discrete action AP

with 1,375 combinations formed by the cross-product of 5

memory-footprint levels, 5 BB-count levels, 11 per-BB length distributions, and 5 instruction-type distributions. The Basic Block Agent observes a 12-dimensional state SBB (remaining instruction budget, current privilege level, and history of recently generated instruction types) and emits a continuous action ABB that parameterizes the instruction-type distribution and BB-termination distribution for the current BB. 

Networks and Optimization. The Program Agent is a 3-layer MLP with 128-wide hidden layers trained with Rainbow DQN at learning rate 1e −4. The Basic Block Agent is an up-to-5-layer MLP with 64-wide hidden layers trained with PPO at learning rate 1e −3, initial action standard devia-tion action_std =0 .5 (annealed to a minimum of 0.1), intrinsic/extrinsic reward coefficients αint =1 and αext =2 , and extrinsic-baseline diminishing factor γ=0 .75 . The Actor and Critic share a common trunk but use separate value heads for intrinsic and extrinsic returns, as described in Section III-C2. 

Fuzzing Environment. HiFuzz integrates with Cocotb for testbench orchestration, Verilator [22] for RTL simulation, and Spike as the ISA reference model. Coverage is collected via instrumentation-based primitives at the RTL level—Line, Toggle, MUX [5], and Control Register [6]—and aggregated per module for the ACRM. Episode budgets, the ACRM 

β schedule, and the BB Encoder checkpoint paths are all configurable through a single YAML file, which makes every experiment in this paper reproducible by swapping configura-tion files without code changes. 

Platform. All experiments run on an Intel Xeon Gold 6246R server with one NVIDIA A100 GPU. Every fuzzing campaign uses one CPU core per fuzzer to keep simulation cost comparable across baselines. APPENDIX BBB E NCODER MODEL SELECTION 

We evaluated multiple sequence model architectures for the Basic Block Encoder, including Bi-LSTM, GPT-2, and RWKV-7. Each architecture offers different trade-offs among sequence inductive bias, optimization stability, model size, and inference latency. 

Bi-LSTM. Our encoder employs a 2-layer bidirectional LSTM with attention-based pooling. The bidirectional struc-ture captures context from both forward and backward di-rections, essential for understanding instruction dependencies within a basic block. Architecture details:  

> •

Embedding Dimension: 64  

> •

LSTM Hidden Dimension: 128 (bidirectional → 256 output)  

> •

Number of Layers: 2  

> •

Pooling Mechanism: Attention-based pooling  

> •

Output Dimension: 96 (L2-normalized) 

GPT-2. We evaluated two variants of the Transformer-based GPT-2 architecture: GPT-2-small (6 layers, 768 hidden) and GPT-2 (12 layers, 1024 hidden). Transformers are expressive sequence models, but their modeling strength is concentrated in longer-range interactions than those typically required by basic blocks, and their larger parameter counts make scratch training under our two-stage curriculum less attractive than a smaller recurrent encoder. 

RWKV-7. RWKV is a recent architecture that combines recurrent computation with Transformer-like mixing through linear attention mechanisms. It is a compelling general-purpose sequence model, but in our setting its capacity remains substantially larger than Bi-LSTM, making it a less economi-cal choice for a basic-block encoder trained from scratch. Table V compares the model sizes and CPU/GPU inference latency of the evaluated encoders. TABLE V: Comparison of encoder model architectures.                      

> Model Params Size (MB) CPU Infer. GPU Infer. (ms/batch) (ms/batch)
> Bi-LSTM (Ours) 0.69M 2.65 52.41 3.71
> GPT-2-small 7.57M 28.86 67.83 4.32
> GPT-2 43.61M 166.35 150.46 8.59 RWKV-7 90.97M 347.00 1452.04 16.34

Selection Rationale. We selected Bi-LSTM based on two key considerations: 1) Sequence-Structure Match: Basic blocks are short, strictly ordered, single-entry single-exit sequences. Their semantics depend primarily on local instruction neigh-borhoods, operand roles, and forward/backward depen-dencies, which align naturally with a bidirectional re-11 current encoder and reduce the need for heavier long-context attention machinery. 2) Compact and Sufficient: Our encoder is trained from scratch with a two-stage curriculum rather than ini-tialized from large external corpora. In this regime, Bi-LSTM is easier to optimize and less parameter-hungry than the Transformer and RWKV alternatives, while Fig. 13 shows that both training stages converge smoothly in practice. Table V further shows that Bi-LSTM is not only the smallest model, but also the fastest on both CPU and GPU in our setting. Taken together, these results indicate that there is no practical need to move to a substantially larger model for this basic-block sequence task. APPENDIX CGENERATED PROGRAM QUALITY (a) (b) 

> (c)

Fig. 14: Generated program quality across fuzzers: (a) preva-lence, (b) dependency-chain length, and (c) ISA opcode cov-erage. To characterize the quality of the programs that each fuzzer actually emits—independently of whether those programs subsequently trigger coverage—we compare DifuzzRTL [6], ProcessorFuzz [8], Cascade [7], and HiFuzz over the same 

24 -hour campaign along three complementary dimensions: 

Prevalence , Dependency , and ISA Coverage .

Prevalence is the fraction of emitted instructions that actu-ally contribute to fuzzing, as opposed to scaffolding/overhead. As shown in Fig. 14(a), DifuzzRTL’s stream is dominated by overhead (average 6.5% prevalence), ProcessorFuzz improves to 66 .5% , Cascade reaches 92 .0% , and HiFuzz attains near-saturation at both average and median 96 .7% . This confirms that letting the Program Agent decide program structure, and the Basic Block Agent decide per-BB instruction mix, concentrates generation budget on semantically meaningful instructions rather than on boilerplate. 

Dependency reports the length of instruction dependency chains, which determines how deeply a test can stress pipelined micro-architectural corner cases. Fig. 14(b) shows that DifuzzRTL and ProcessorFuzz stall at an average chain length of 2.1, Cascade reaches 9.0, and HiFuzz extends to an average of 18 .5 (median 6.0). The long tail comes from HRL decisions that deliberately chain operand reuses across BBs, which neither a pure mutator nor a purely constructive generator tends to produce. 

ISA Coverage measures the functional breadth of the emitted instruction mix over the RISC-V G subset (excluding the A extension, since this paper focuses on single-hart generation). Fig. 14(c) shows that DifuzzRTL and ProcessorFuzz cover 

63% , Cascade reaches 93% , and HiFuzz reaches 96% , with most of the gap explained by HiFuzz’s broader exercising of system-level instructions (CSR operations and privilege-mode transitions). APPENDIX DBUG DETECTION DETAILS 

Following Encarsia’s taxonomy [24], we group injected bugs by structural root cause rather than by high-level symp-tom. Signal Mix-ups capture wrong driver, operand, or ex-pression choices in assignments and datapath logic; they often manifest architecturally as corrupted values, wrong control de-cisions, or misrouted microarchitectural state updates. Broken Conditionals capture missing guards, missing cases, or overly permissive predicates; these bugs typically expose exceptional cases, state-dependent checks, or privilege conditions that should have blocked an operation. Each EnCorpus design instance contains exactly one in-jected bug, and Encarsia uses formal checks to ensure that this transformation can induce an architecturally observable deviation. Therefore, a successful detection in Tables VI and VII should be interpreted as the fuzzer’s ability to generate a test that propagates the injected RTL fault to ISA-visible behavior, not merely to toggle the local logic containing the bug. 12 TABLE VI: Bug mapping for different designs and bug types. 

Design Bug Type Bug IDs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Rocket Mix-ups 144 293 347 361 640 673 767 774 804 826 832 858 863 1081 1094 Conditionals 14 28 46 66 71 277 285 295 305 394 397 408 588 633 718 

BOOM Mix-ups 27 56 137 148 228 589 604 657 741 787 954 990 1028 1073 1236 Conditionals 3 6 137 160 168 176 187 195 200 513 517 530 708 727 975 TABLE VII: Detailed bug detection results. ✓: detected, –: not detected. 

#Rocket Mix-ups Rocket Cond. BOOM Mix-ups BOOM Cond. 

DF PF CA HF DF PF CA HF DF PF CA HF DF PF CA HF 1 – – ✓ ✓ – – – – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

2 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

3 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – – – – – – – – – – –4 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – – – ✓ ✓ – ✓ – – – –5 – – – – – – – – ✓ ✓ – ✓ – – – –6 – – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – ✓ ✓ – – – –7 – – – – ✓ ✓ – – – – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

8 – – – – – – – – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – – –9 – – – – – – – – – – ✓ ✓ – – – –10 – – – – ✓ ✓ – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – – –11 – – – – – – – – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

12 – – – – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

13 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – – – – – – – – – – –14 – – – – – – – – – – ✓ ✓ – – – –15 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – ✓

13