Title: Federated Formal Verification: Cross-Backend Citation, Cross-Axis Convergence, and AI-Orchestrated Proof Dispatch for Production Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.02019v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 02:28:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 46

Markdown Content:
## Federated Formal Verification: Cross-Backend Citation, Cross-Axis Convergence, and AI-Orchestrated Proof Dispatch for Production Systems 

Pierre Falda 

pierre.falda@bullish.com 

Bullish 

Abstract 

We propose a federated architecture for production formal verification. Rather than forcing all obligations into a single proof-assistant kernel, the architecture treats a verification campaign as a polyglot proof system composed of three mechanisms: cross-backend citation discharges a TLA+ obligation by citing an equivalent theorem in a structurally distinct kernel, with build-system-level drift-resistance enforced through kernel-level closure-assertion directives (Coq Print Assumptions , Lean 4 #print axioms , and per-kernel analogues — established practice in each kernel’s community, composed here under a CI-gated citation primitive); cross-axis convergence 

composes per-obligation verdicts across independent verifiers into operational kernel-agreement gates (the agreement is build-system-enforced rather than a logical soundness theorem; the resid-ual correspondence-certificate question is named as an open problem in §6.3 and partially checked empirically in §5.5); AI-orchestrated mass-parallel dispatch fans out autonomous specialist agents in waves with disjoint file-touch zones. Verification authority resides at the kernel-directive and CI-gated-citation layer; the AI layer is untrusted proof-search labour inside a trusted CI envelope. We validate the architecture on two production subsystems of the Mercury high-frequency-trading platform: a Raft consensus subsystem with full algorithmic scope (joint consensus, leadership trans-fer, log compaction, linearizable client reads, dynamic reconfiguration) and a financial-arithmetic invariant layer (balance accounting, automated-market-maker curve invariants, isolated-margin, lock-tracking settlement). The validation campaign reduced a 26-axiom Raft census to zero in 17 active hours of single-session wallclock, an empirical ≈ 60 × per-axiom reduction against the team’s prior Path-A.2 TLAPS ghost-composition baseline at intra-shape scope (§5.2.2; classified 

author-prior under the §5.2 comparator-hygiene template); a within-method comparator (§5.2.1; 

author-generated ) and a cross-precedent IronFleet comparator (§5.2.3; independent-published under three explicit scope qualifiers — cross-protocol, cross-scope, cross-rigour) report consistent direction-of-effect. The ratios are a property of 2026 AI-agent compute economics and should be expected to evolve. The campaign also brought five numeric canonicals to 6-axis chorus discharge, and surfaced four real production bugs — including a perp-funding 10 12 over-charge structurally invis-ible to single-backend specification campaigns. Compared to verified-Raft precedents (IronFleet, Verdi-Raft, MongoRaftReconfig), the architecture delivers broader coverage on algorithmic-scope dimensions (joint consensus, leadership transfer, log compaction, linearizable client reads, dynamic reconfiguration) at one-to-two orders of magnitude lower per-axiom wallclock under the same three scope qualifiers as §5.2.3 (cross-protocol, cross-scope, cross-rigour), against a trusted base that is larger than what the verified-extraction precedents accept (the present method does not claim verified extraction). The principal open problem is the mechanisation of correspondence certifi-cates — equivalence between a TLA+ obligation and its cited external theorem, currently checked empirically by the cross-axis matrix but not yet mechanically proved. 

Keywords : formal verification, distributed consensus, cross-backend proof citation, AI-orchestrated proof automation, TLA+, Coq, Lean 4, Apalache, multi-prover convergence, 1

> arXiv:2606.02019v1 [cs.LO] 1 Jun 2026

financial-system verification, mechanical theorem proving. 

1. Introduction 

1.1 The cost-of-rigour frontier 

Mechanical verification of production software systems faces a persistent cost-of-rigour frontier defined by three structural constraints. 

Backend monoculture . A verification campaign typically rests on a single proof-assistant kernel, so a kernel soundness bug, an automation regression, or a stdlib axiom shift becomes a single point of failure for the entire artefact. Every prior mechanical proof of a Raft-family safety property uses exactly one verifier (TLAPS for Ongaro (Ongaro 2014) and MongoRaftReconfig (Schultz et al. 2022); Coq for Verdi-Raft (Wilcox et al. 2015; Woos et al. 2016) and Velisarios (Rahli et al. 2018); Dafny + Z3 for IronFleet (Hawblitzel et al. 2015); Ivy + Z3 for the Padon and Scimitar lines (Padon et al. 2017, 2024; Schultz et al. 2024); Verus for Anvil (Sun et al. 2024; Lattuada et al. 2024)). 

Excluded algorithmic scope . Published verified protocols routinely omit features the production deployment depends on. Verdi-Raft’s PLDI 2015 paper (Wilcox et al. 2015) explicitly excludes reconfiguration, log compaction, and linearizable client reads, all of which any production Raft library must implement; the CPP 2016 follow-up (Woos et al. 2016) formalises additional Raft extensions but does not close the production gap. The TigerBeetle Viewstamped Replication challenge excluded reconfiguration and snapshot transfer; etcd’s TLA+ specification covers a subset of state transitions; CCF’s authors note their consensus is “based on an unproven algorithm” (Howard et al. 2025). 

Per-axiom serialisation . The dominant cost of a multi-thousand-step proof is iteration on a single specialist’s working memory, scaling linearly with proof complexity and rate-limiting the multi-person-year campaigns reported in the precedents (IronFleet 3.7 person-years for IronRSL; Verdi-Raft ≈ 2 person-years community estimate for the original Raft proof; MongoRaftReconfig ≈ 4person-months for Raft reconfiguration safety). Each constraint is independently addressable in principle, but published precedents address subsets only. The literature trades each constraint against the others. The common thread across the precedent set is that backend monoculture, scope exclusion, and serialisation are coupled : relaxing any one is observed to require infrastructure that the precedent’s authors did not invest in for the published artefact. 

1.2 Why this matters 

The three constraints have braked the diffusion of formal verification into industrial practice for thirty years. Hoare’s Verified Software Grand Challenge (Hoare 2003) identified exactly this cost frontier as the rate-limiting step in industrial adoption and framed it as a problem requiring sus-tained community effort. The present architecture attacks the frontier by composition of orthogo-nal mechanisms — cross-backend citation, cross-axis convergence, and AI-orchestrated dispatch — rather than by an advance in any single kernel. Practitioners who attempt formal verification at production scale routinely abandon the effort when the projected wallclock exceeds the project’s tolerance — the reason the production Raft library landscape (etcd, TiKV, CockroachDB, Scyl-laDB, jgroups-raft, Atomix Copycat, Real Logic’s Aeron Cluster, TigerBeetle’s VSR) ships with 2no published mechanical verification of any specific implementation, despite the well-documented failure modes that Jepsen-style fault-injection testing surfaces in those libraries. The opportunity is large because the cost-of-rigour frontier is the rate-limiting step in industrial adoption rather than a fundamental property of mechanical verification. An architecture that compresses the projected wallclock by one or two orders of magnitude on the constrained dimen-sion, without weakening the soundness claim , opens the frontier to a substantially broader class of production systems than the precedent posture admits. The stakes are concrete: the validation campaign reported in section 4.3 caught a 10 12 over-charge of accrued funding in a perp-funding settlement path — a silent multiplicative scale mismatch in a financial-arithmetic layer that is structurally invisible to the spec-driven verification campaigns of the precedent literature, none of which model a financial-arithmetic layer with mechanically-checked numeric invariants. 

1.3 Contribution: a federated architecture for production formal verification 

This paper proposes a federated architecture for production formal verification. Instead of forcing all proof obligations into a single proof assistant or model checker, we treat a production verification campaign as a polyglot proof system: TLA+ expresses system-level obligations, specialist backends discharge obligations suited to their proof shape, CI-enforced citation gates preserve drift-resistance across the heterogeneous trust base, and AI agents coordinate parallel proof discovery without entering the trusted computing base. The result is not a replacement for proof kernels but an 

orchestration layer around them . We validate the architecture on two production subsystems of the Mercury trading platform: a full-scope Raft consensus subsystem and a financial-arithmetic invariant layer (section 4). The architecture has three composable mechanisms and one methodological distinction. 

Cross-backend citation (section 3.1) is a build-system-gated primitive that discharges a TLA+ proof obligation by citing an equivalent theorem in an external proof system — Coq, Lean 4, Why3, Apalache, hand-encoded SMT-LIB v2 dispatched to standalone Z3, or CBMC — with the build system re-checking the cited theorem under its own kernel on every commit and failing the build loudly on any drift. The primitive eliminates backend monoculture per-obligation: the obligation’s discharge transitively depends on the cited kernel, which is structurally distinct from the host kernel (TLAPS). The semantic equivalence between the TLA+ obligation and the cited external theorem is a correspondence certificate (section 3.1.4) — a first-class component of the architecture’s trust base, currently human-asserted, that the cross-axis convergence matrix partially checks empirically (section 5.5) but does not yet mechanically prove. 

Cross-axis convergence (section 3.2) records per-obligation verdicts across N independent verifiers and composes them into dual- and triple-kernel agreement gates that fail loud if any one axis regresses. The composition is operational rather than documentary: the build system enforces the agreement, not an out-of-band attestation. The epistemic value scales with paradigm disjointness — deductive proof versus bounded symbolic model checking versus probabilistic model checking carry stronger orthogonality than within-paradigm variants (Coq vs Lean, which share CIC ancestry). 

AI-orchestrated mass-parallel dispatch (section 3.3) compresses the campaign-level wallclock by fanning out N autonomous specialist agents — one per verifier or one per obligation — coordinated by a single survey-and-route agent that infers the appropriate backend per obligation and dis-patches in waves with disjoint file-touch zones. The wallclock compression is empirical: section 5.2 3reports a measured ≈ 60 × per-axiom reduction against the team’s prior Path-A.2 TLAPS ghost-composition baseline (§5.2.2), with a within-method comparator (§5.2.1) and a cross-precedent IronFleet comparator (§5.2.3) corroborating direction-of-effect under named scope qualifiers. Criti-cally, the AI layer is untrusted proof-search labour inside a trusted CI envelope (section 3.3): agents propose, attempt, and report negatives; verification authority resides with kernel-level closure-assertion directives — the established Print Assumptions directive in Coq (shipped since Coq 8.5 in 2016, used as an end-of-development audit gate in Common-Criteria-adjacent verified-software submissions), the analogous #print axioms in Lean 4, and the corresponding prover-cascade and counterexample-exhaustion checks for each wired backend — composed with the CI-gated citation primitive of section 3.1. The composition is the novel contribution; the per-kernel directives it composes are established practice in their respective communities. This separation is load-bearing — it allows agent parallelism to scale without expanding the trusted computing base. 

The algorithmic-correctness-versus-annotation-depth distinction (section 3.4) separates the load-bearing soundness chain (TLA+ specification → TLAPS proof → annotation-processor-generated runtime invariant verifier) from the additional epistemic redundancy of the cross-axis chorus. The distinction supports honest epistemic accounting: a regression in an annotation-layer axis port does not invalidate the algorithmic claim because the algorithmic chain remains intact. propose / attempt / report negatives   

> kernel-checked closure
> spans
> TRUSTED — verification authority
> CI citation gates
> (re-check Print Assumptions /
> #print axioms / analogous closure)
> Cross-axis convergence matrix
> (per-obligation × per-axis verdict;
> dual- and triple-kernel agreement)
> Runtime SpecBridge hooks
> (annotation-processor-generated
> invariant verifiers; spec-hash regen)
> Heterogeneous backends — structurally distinct verification paradigms
> TLAPS
> deductive
> Coq
> CIC + Coquelicot
> Lean 4
> CIC + Mathlib
> Why3
> multi-prover
> Apalache
> symbolic BMC
> PRISM
> probabilistic
> Z3 / CBMC / Lincheck
> SMT / native / JVM
> UNTRUSTED — proof-search labour
> AI Coordinator
> (surveys, routes by proof shape,
> dispatches in waves)
> Specialist agents
> (per-backend port authoring,
> race-orchestration, honest-negative)
> TLA+ proof obligations
> (specification-level invariants, safety, liveness)
> Open layer: correspondence certificates — TLA+ obligation ↔external theorem equivalence
> (currently human-asserted; mechanisation is the principal open problem)

Figure 1. Trust-hierarchy overview of the federated verification architecture. TLA+ proof obligations enter at the top. The AI layer (UNTRUSTED — proof-search labour) comprises a coordinator that 

4surveys gaps and routes by proof shape and N specialist agents that author per-backend ports, race-orchestrate, and report negatives honestly. Specialists dispatch to a heterogeneous backend roster spanning deductive (TLAPS, Coq, Lean 4, Why3), bounded (Apalache), probabilistic (PRISM), SMT (standalone Z3), and production-language (CBMC, Lincheck) verifiers. The TRUSTED layer comprises the CI citation gates (which re-check Print Assumptions / #print axioms /analogous closure on every commit), the cross-axis convergence matrix (per-obligation × per-axis verdict, composed into dual- and triple-kernel agreement gates), and the runtime SpecBridge hooks (annotation-processor-generated invariant verifiers with spec-hash-keyed regeneration that closes the implementation-versus-specification gap at compile time). The open dashed layer is the corre-spondence certificate* — the equivalence between a TLA+ obligation and the external theorem cited to discharge it. Currently human-asserted; mechanisation is the principal open problem the architecture surfaces (sections 3.1.4, 6.3, 6.4).* 

1.4 Why this is new 

The three constraints have been individually relaxed in recent precedents. Bythos (Zhao et al. 2024) embeds TLA semantics into Coq for Byzantine-protocol composition, addressing the backend boundary at the language-design layer. CCF Smart Casual Verification (Howard et al. 2025) integrates TLC model-checking continuously into CI to address scope-exclusion via fast iteration on a model-checked artefact. Anvil (Sun et al. 2024) verifies Kubernetes controller liveness in Verus with TLA-embedding, demonstrating that production-scale liveness is tractable on a verifier-with-embedding stack. The common limitation across these recent precedents is that each pursues a single axis of relaxation. None addresses backend monoculture by allowing arbitrary external citations from a host proof sys-tem; none addresses serialisation by parallelising across an autonomous agent fleet; none combines the relaxations into a method that closes complete classes of obligations across heterogeneous proof shapes within a single engineering platform. The advance the present method offers is compositionality of the three relaxations. The cross-backend citation primitive, the cross-axis convergence matrix, and the AI-orchestrated dispatch protocol are independently useful, but their composition is what makes a 26-axiom Raft census closeable in seventeen single-session hours rather than five-to-seven person-months. The same composition also closes a financial-arithmetic invariant layer with heterogeneous proof shapes — demonstrating that the method generalises across proof-shape classes within a single engineering substrate. 

1.5 Validation strategy 

We validate the method on two subsystems of the Mercury high-frequency-trading platform — a production-deployed distributed-consensus subsystem and a production-deployed financial-arithmetic invariant layer. The validation has two purposes. First, it confirms that the method scales to a real production system with all the engineering constraints of one (large existing codebase, performance constraints, deployment pressure). Second, the cross-subsystem application — same toolchain, same dispatch protocol, same citation primitive on two structurally distinct proof-shape classes — establishes that the method is a method rather than a one-off tactical alignment with one subsystem’s incidental properties. Mercury’s Raft is a production-deployed implementation of Diego Ongaro’s Raft (Ongaro 2014; Ongaro and Ousterhout 2014) with joint consensus, leadership transfer, log compaction, linearizable 5client reads, and dynamic reconfiguration. Mercury’s Themis matching engine implements balance accounting, automated-market-maker liquidity-pool curve invariants, an isolated-margin product family, and lock-tracking settlement. Both subsystems run inside the same JVM process in the production deployment. 

1.6 Paper organization 

Section 2 surveys related work — academic verified-consensus precedents, big-tech industrial TLA+ practice, the production Raft library landscape, the broader verified-systems literature, cross-backend verification, and AI-assisted formal verification — and identifies six recurring compro-mises against which the architecture is positioned. Section 3 presents the architecture’s three primary mechanisms plus the algorithmic-versus-annotation distinction. Section 4 reports the cross-subsystem validation. Section 5 reports performance: the wallclock benchmark against single-specialist and IronFleet-baseline comparators, the cross-axis convergence matrix empirics, the production-bug-finding empirics, and honest negative results. Section 6 discusses limitations, threats to validity, and the open problem of mechanising correspondence certificates. Section 7 concludes. Acknowledgements appear in section 8; references in section 9. Appendix A bundles per-claim verification recipes that produce every numerical and architectural claim in this paper from the published source repository. 

2. Related work 

A method-paper claim is meaningful only against a profiled prior-art baseline. This section dis-charges that bookkeeping. Section 2.1 surveys mechanical verification of Raft and adjacent con-sensus protocols — the prior art most directly comparable to the validation subsystem. Section 2.2 surveys the broader verified-systems literature that informs the method-design choices. Section 2.3 surveys cross-backend verification, the closest published precedent for the citation primitive. Section 2.4 surveys AI-assisted formal verification, the closest published precedent for the dispatch protocol. Section 2.5 catalogues six recurring compromises observable across the precedent set, against which the architecture is positioned. 

2.1 Mechanical verification of Raft and adjacent consensus 

The published mechanical-verification literature for Raft and adjacent consensus protocols spans approximately fifteen years of academic and industrial activity. Table 1 enumerates the precedents we survey, recording for each the verifier(s) used, the proven scope, whether liveness was mechan-ically discharged, and whether the verified artefact reached production deployment. The table is deliberately broad: it includes every published mechanical proof of Raft we can identify, every recent industrial spec-and-model-checking effort touching Raft-family protocols, the Byzantine-fault-tolerant precedents that share methodological DNA with the cross-axis approach, and the production Raft library landscape that ships without published mechanical verification.             

> Year Project Backend(s) Scope Liveness Production 2014 Ongaro PhD raft.tla
> (Ongaro 2014) TLA+ + TLAPS LogCompleteness mechanically proved against admitted invariants No Specification only 2015 Verdi-Raft (Wilcox et al. 2015; Woos et al. 2016) Coq State Machine Safety + linearizability; ~2 person-years (community estimate) No Research artefact ( vard )

6Year Project Backend(s) Scope Liveness Production 2015 IronFleet / IronRSL (Hawblitzel et al. 2015, 2017) Dafny + Z3 Multi-Paxos safety + liveness; verified extraction to executable C#; ~3.7 person-years Yes Microsoft research artefact 2015 AWS use of TLA+ (Newcombe et al. 2015) TLA+ + TLC DynamoDB, S3, EBS — model-checked, not theorem-proved No TLA+ specs guided design 2016 Chand–Liu–Stoller Multi-Paxos (Chand et al. 2016) TLA+ + TLAPS Multi-Paxos full safety No Research 2017 Padon–Losa–Sagiv– Shoham Paxos-EPR (Padon et al. 2017) Ivy + Z3 Safety of Paxos, Multi-Paxos, Vertical Paxos, Fast Paxos, Flexible Paxos, Stoppable Paxos No Research 2018 Liveness-to-safety reduction (Padon et al. 2018) Ivy + Z3 First mechanised liveness for Multi-Paxos via reduction Yes Research 2018 Disel (Sergey et al. 2018) Coq + Hoare Type Theory TPC, query layer No Research framework 2018 Velisarios (Rahli et al. 2018) Coq + logic-of-events First mechanically-checked PBFT safety No Research 2020 Aneris (Krogh-Jespersen et al. 2020) Coq + Iris TPC + replicated logging No Research 2022 MongoRecfg (Schultz et al. 2022) TLA+ + TLAPS LeaderCompl. + StateMachine-Safety No Ships in MongoDB 2022 Azure Cosmos DB TLA+ (Hackett et al. 2022) TLA+ + TLC Cosmos DB consistency model No Cosmos DB ships 2022 Oracle Labs 

bft-consensus-agda 

(Carr et al. 2022) Agda HotStuff, LibraBFT, DiemBFT safety No Research; archived 2024 Verus (Lattuada et al. 2024) Verus (Rust → Z3) Foundation for Rust systems verification n/a Used at Microsoft, Amazon 2024 Anvil (Sun et al. 2024) Verus + TLA-embedding Liveness of Kubernetes controllers Yes Verified controllers 2024 etcd-raft TLA+ + trace validation TLA+ + TLC + trace validation Subset of state transitions No etcd ships 2024 mypyvy / Scimitar (Padon et al. 2024; Schultz et al. 2024) Ivy + Z3 Inductive AbstractRaft + AsyncRaft safety No Research 2024 Bythos (Zhao et al. 2024) Coq + TLA-in-Coq Byzantine composition safety + liveness Yes Research 2025 CCF Smart Casual (Howard et al. 2025) TLA+ + TLC + sim + trace Modified Raft model in CI; 6 bugs caught pre-prod Yes (MC) Azure Conf. Ledger 2025 DAG-based BFT verification (NFM 2025) TLA+ + TLAPS DAG-Rider, Cordial Miners, Hashgraph, BullShark, Aleph No Research 2026 LeaseGuard (Davis et al. 2026) TLA+ + TLC + Python sim + LogCabin C++ Raft leader-lease, Read-Your-Writes No LogCabin (research) 

Table 1. Mechanical-verification precedents for Raft and adjacent consensus. 

The production Raft library landscape carries an additional class of relevant prior art that does not fit Table 1’s inclusion criteria but bears mention. The widely-used production Raft li-braries — etcd’s etcd-io/raft (powering Kubernetes, HashiCorp Consul, Apache Kafka KRaft), TiKV/TiDB’s Rust port of etcd-raft, CockroachDB’s Raft layer, YugabyteDB’s Raft with leader-lease enhancements, ScyllaDB’s Raft (used for schema and topology coordination), Atomix Copycat, Real Logic’s Aeron Cluster (used in financial trading systems), and TigerBeetle (Viewstamped Replication rather than Raft) — all ship without their own published mechanical verification of their specific implementations. etcd added a partial TLA+ specification and a trace-validation tool in 2024; TiKV documents that its membership-change protocol diverges from the paper for “simple implementation”; the others rely primarily on Jepsen-style fault-injection testing. 7We could not identify published mechanical formal verification of Google’s Spanner or Chubby; Google has not published proofs of their internal consensus implementations (the underlying Multi-Paxos has been verified independently by Chand–Liu–Stoller as catalogued in Table 1). We could not identify published mechanical proof of Meta’s HotStuff or DiemBFT consensus implementations; the closest proxy is the Oracle Labs work catalogued above. We identified no published TLA+ or mechanical-verification consensus papers from Apple. IBM Research has published verification of customisable Hyperledger Fabric consensus rules but not a Raft proof. 

2.2 The broader verified-systems literature 

The verified-systems tradition extends beyond consensus to verified compilers (CompCert (Leroy 2006)), verified operating-system kernels (seL4 (Klein et al. 2009)), verified cryptographic libraries (F* + Project Everest (Swamy et al. 2016; Bhargavan et al. 2017)), verified distributed key-value stores (Chapar, Cure (Lesani et al. 2016; Akkoorath et al. 2016)), and verified Rust-based systems software (Verus (Lattuada et al. 2024); Anvil (Sun et al. 2024)). The pattern across this literature is that a single backend (Coq for CompCert and seL4; F* for Project Everest; Verus for Anvil) is selected per project and the entire artefact rests epistemically on that backend’s kernel. None of the precedents in this tradition cross-checks the same theorem across multiple structurally distinct kernels. The matching-engine financial-arithmetic verification literature is comparatively thin. Most ex-changes treat the matching engine as a hand-coded high-performance system gated by integration tests, fuzz suites, and property-based tests rather than mechanical proofs. We could not identify published mechanical formal verification of a production matching engine’s arithmetic invariant layer; the closest adjacent comparators (TigerBeetle’s deterministic simulation testing) operate at a methodologically distinct verification class (trace-validation rather than theorem-proving). 

2.3 Cross-backend verification 

Cross-backend verification has appeared informally across F* + Z3 (where F* discharges Hoare triples to Z3 and accepts Z3’s verdict as proof), Lean Mathlib citing Coq results, and Isabelle’s Sledgehammer dispatching to Z3, SPASS, and CVC. We classify the published precedents along four classes of cross-backend integration; the citation primitive of section 3.1 occupies a fifth position structurally distinct from all four. A first class is whole-language semantic embedding , exemplified by Bythos (Zhao et al. 2024), which embeds TLA’s temporal operators into Coq via CoFixpoint constructs and proves the embedded-TLA propositions in Coq directly. Bythos and the present method are architecturally distinct: Bythos embeds TLA semantics into Coq and proves the embedded-TLA propositions in Coq’s native language, whereas the citation primitive of section 3.1 leaves TLA semantics in TLAPS, exhibits a sister theorem in the external kernel’s native vocabulary, and uses the build system as the meta-system that ensures the sister theorem closes and remains cited. Section 3.1.4 develops this comparison further. A second class is the whole-tool trust delegation pattern (F* + Z3 discharges Hoare triples to Z3 internally, accepting Z3’s unsat verdict as proof). The trust regime there is “Z3 is sound on the SMT-LIB fragment F* generates.” The citation primitive’s trust regime is narrower: the cited external theorem is a specific named theorem whose closure is asserted by the kernel’s own Print Assumptions -class directive, and the build-system gate verifies that specific assertion. 8A third class is de novo embedding of one logic into another — for instance, Sledgehammer’s translation of higher-order Isabelle goals into first-order SMT, or Coq’s coq-of-ocaml translation of OCaml programs into Coq. These translations require an embedding correctness argument that the method’s per-obligation citation primitive does not require. A fourth class is build-system-integrated single-kernel verification , exemplified by LiquidHaskell (Vazou et al. 2014) and especially its GHC-plugin reframing (Di Napoli et al. 2020), in which refinement-type checking is wired into the host language compiler and a refinement violation aborts the build with a non-zero exit code. The integration mechanism is single-source-language (Haskell) and single-kernel (the Z3 verdict on the SMT encoding); the build-system-gated discipline (compile-time, fail-loud) is the direct precedent for the citation primitive’s Gradle gate of section 3.1.2. The present method extends from the single-source-language single-kernel posture to the multi-source-language multi-kernel composition described in section 3.1. 

2.4 AI-assisted formal verification 

AI-assisted formal verification has a sparse precedent literature in 2024–2026, but the precedent set is concentrated in a single regime — LLM-driven proof search inside one kernel . The Deep-Mind AlphaGeometry line (Trinh et al. 2024) uses an LLM as a tactic-search guide over a single custom geometry proof kernel (with the AlphaProof successor extending the same regime to Lean). Lean Copilot (Song et al. 2025) integrates LLM-driven tactic suggestion and premise selection into the Lean 4 interactive proof workflow. Sledgehammer (Paulson and Blanchette 2010), the longest-running precedent of this kind, dispatches Isabelle goals across an automation cascade of external first-order provers (E, SPASS, CVC, Z3) and translates the discovered proof back into Isabelle’s kernel. Each of these is single-host-kernel by construction : the LLM (or premise-selector, or automation cascade) lives inside one proof system and helps that system close its own obligations faster. A second precedent set sits one rung lower in the trust stack — LLM-agent orchestration patterns that compose multi-step reasoning without delegating verification authority. Plan-then-execute patterns (The LangChain Team 2023; Wang et al. 2023) decompose a task into an explicit plan-step followed by execution-steps (Plan-and-Solve adds an explicit “plan first, then solve” chain-of-thought instruction at the prompt layer; LangChain wraps the same decomposition in an executor harness). Self-critique patterns — Reflexion (Shinn et al. 2023) and Self-Refine (Madaan et al. 2023) — establish the discipline that an agent must surface what it could not accomplish, feeding that admission into the next iteration (Reflexion adds an explicit verbal-reinforcement loop on negative outcomes; Self-Refine iterates within a single task on self-generated critique). Multi-agent debate (Du et al. 2023) composes independent agent verdicts into agreement-via-disagreement. Process reward models (Lightman et al. 2023) reward per-step reasoning rather than only final outcome. The dispatch architecture of section 3.3 occupies a structurally distinct position from each of these: it lifts the honest-negative discipline (Reflexion-family verbal-reflection on negatives) into a coordinator-mediated cross-axis re-routing primitive (extending plan-then-execute decomposition with a per-step structurally-typed backend-roster re-dispatch rather than within-tool retry), uses the per-step verdict as a process reward to route the next dispatch (extending the PRM intuition into an orchestration loop), and substitutes kernel-verified PROVED for the agreement signal that multi-agent debate must approximate via cross-model consensus. The verdicts that drive routing decisions are kernel-emitted closure assertions, not LLM self-assessments — this is the load-bearing departure from the precedent set. 9Concretely, the dispatch architecture is not a single-kernel tactic-search aid (as the proof-search-side precedent set is); it is a coordinator-and-specialist topology for proof campaigns in which specialist agents author per-backend ports across the citation primitive’s heterogeneous kernel roster (TLAPS / Coq / Lean 4 / Why3 / Apalache / PRISM / standalone Z3 / CBMC / Lincheck) and a coordinator routes obligations by static signal. The agents do not enter the trusted computing base — verifica-tion authority remains with kernel-level Print Assumptions -class directives and the build-system citation gates (section 3.3 design principle). The two design-space differences from the single-kernel proof-search precedent set are therefore (i) cross-backend campaign orchestration rather than single-backend tactic search, and (ii) honest-negative discipline (section 3.3.3) as the architectural choice that makes autonomous proof search epistemically sound — every dispatched specialist must sur-face what it could not close, which the coordinator then cross-routes to a structurally appropriate alternative. The dispatch protocol’s empirical impact reported in section 5.2 should be expected to evolve as the underlying agent economics evolve; the architectural contribution (the coordinator-and-specialist topology with honest-negative reporting and trust-base separation) is the durable claim. 

2.5 Six recurring compromises 

Six recurring compromises stand out across the precedent set. We catalogue them here and return to the architecture’s positioning against each in section 3. 

Single-backend monoculture is universal across the mechanical Raft and Raft-family proofs in Table 1. None cross-checks the same theorem across multiple independent kernels with disjoint trusted bases. 

Liveness deferral is the rule rather than the exception. Only IronFleet, the Padon et al. 2018 liveness-to-safety reduction (Padon et al. 2018), Anvil, Bythos, and CCF (model-checked) me-chanically discharge liveness. The canonical Raft proofs (Ongaro, Verdi-Raft, MongoRaftReconfig, Scimitar) are safety-only. 

Scope exclusions are pervasive. Verdi-Raft excludes reconfiguration and log compaction; the Tiger-Beetle VSR challenge excluded reconfiguration and snapshot transfer; etcd’s TLA+ specification covers a subset of state transitions; CCF’s authors explicitly note that their consensus is “based on an unproven algorithm.” 

Specification-versus-proof conflation in industrial reporting is widespread. The AWS, Azure Cosmos DB, MongoDB RaftMongo.tla , etcd TLA+, and CCF efforts are TLC model-checking and trace-validation on bounded state spaces — not deductive theorem-proving — and characterising them as “verified” without that qualification overstates the epistemic status of the result. 

Implementation-versus-specification gap is rarely closed. Even where a mechanical proof exists, the proven Coq, Dafny, or TLA+ artefact is rarely the production binary. Trace-validation projects (etcd, CCF, MongoDB conformance-checking) acknowledge this gap explicitly and address it post hoc rather than at proof construction time. 

Single-operator serialisation of proof campaigns is the cost driver behind the multi-person-year wallclock totals reported across the precedent set. IronFleet’s 3.7 person-years, Verdi-Raft’s ≈ 2person-years, MongoRaftReconfig’s ≈ 4 person-months, and CompCert’s even longer cumulative effort all reflect a single specialist iterating on one obligation at a time , with throughput rate-limited by one expert’s working memory. The compromise is structural rather than methodological — every precedent in Table 1 adopts it implicitly because no precedent invests in a multi-specialist 10 coordination layer that preserves the soundness claim. Section 3.3 attacks this compromise directly via the AI-orchestrated dispatch protocol. The architecture we describe in section 3 is positioned against each of these compromises by a structural mechanism rather than by additional engineering effort within a single-backend posture. 

3. The architecture 

The federated verification architecture has three primary mechanisms and a fourth methodological distinction. Section 3.1 describes the cross-backend citation primitive. Section 3.2 describes the cross-axis convergence matrix. Section 3.3 describes the AI-orchestrated mass-parallel dispatch protocol. Section 3.4 introduces the algorithmic-correctness-versus-annotation-depth distinction that separates the load-bearing soundness chain from the annotation-layer chorus. 

3.1 Cross-backend citation primitive 

The cross-backend citation primitive discharges a TLA+ proof obligation by citing an equivalent theorem in an external proof system, with the build system re-checking the cited theorem on every commit and failing loud on any drift. This section describes the primitive’s design (3.1.1), the build-system mechanism (3.1.2), the dual- and triple-citation gates that compose the primitive into kernel-agreement gates (3.1.3), and the architectural distinction between the primitive and the embedding approach Bythos takes for the same boundary (3.1.4). 

3.1.1 Design A TLA+ proof obligation can be discharged in three ways. The first is a direct TLAPS deductive proof, in which the theorem’s PROOF block is checked by tlapm’s hierarchical proof system and dispatched through the standard Zenon → Isabelle → SMT-cascade chain (Chaudhuri et al. 2010; Cousineau et al. 2012). The second is the cross-backend citation, in which the theo-rem’s PROOF block is replaced by PROOF OMITTED annotated with a structured CITED: tag naming an external proof-system theorem whose closure discharges the obligation. The third is a sister-spec deduction, in which the theorem is annotated PROOF OMITTED \* DEDUCTIVE-DISCHARGE-IN-SISTER: to indicate that the obligation is deductively discharged in a companion specification module. The cross-backend citation is the primitive of interest. The structured CITED: tag carries three pieces of information: the path of the external proof file, a #-separated theorem identifier within that file, and (for dual- and triple-citation rows) || -separated alternate-kernel references for each independent axis the obligation is cited against. The build-system-level mechanism that wires the citation enforces three properties: the cited external theorem must exist in the cited file; the external proof file must check cleanly under its own kernel; and the kernel’s Print Assumptions 

(or analogous) output for the cited theorem must report closure under the global trusted base with no Admitted , Axiom , or Parameter declarations beyond a narrow whitelist of the kernel’s standard library. This use of Print Assumptions extends the directive’s established role as an end-of-development audit gate (e.g., Print Assumptions reports submitted with high-assurance verified-software evaluation packages) by making the assertion a CI-gated invariant rather than a one-time check, and by composing assertions across structurally distinct kernels rather than within a single one. 

3.1.2 Build-system mechanism The primitive is realised as a Gradle task that wires three checks into the build graph at the layer that holds the TLAPS proof. On every build of the parent 11 TLAPS check task, the wired citation task fires three sub-checks. First, the cited TLA+ proof file is grepped for the literal pattern ^THEOREM <theoremName> followed by a CITED: annotation containing the cited external file and theorem name; an absent or drift-broken annotation throws a build exception with a precise diagnostic. Second, the cited external proof file’s verification log is parsed for the Print Assumptions (or #print axioms , or analogous) output for the cited theorem; an absent or impure closure throws. Third, defensively, the count of closure-assertion directives in the external proof file is compared against the count of closure-confirmation lines in the verification log to ensure each asserted closure has a corresponding kernel-confirmed pass. The combination of these three checks makes the primitive drift-resistant by construction . There is no operator-driven attestation step, no manual citation register, no out-of-band log of “the external proof was clean as of date X.” The attestation is the build itself, and the build is run on every commit through the unit-test layer, which gates every pull request. The Gradle DSL that wires the citation primitive ( tla.registerCoqExternalCitation(...) ,

tla.registerLeanExternalCitation(...) , and the dual- and triple-axis siblings) functions as a lightweight meta-logical framework in the sense familiar from the logical-frameworks literature: it composes judgements from heterogeneous object logics — TLAPS first-order set theory, Coq CIC, Lean 4 CIC variant, Why3 multi-prover dispatch, Apalache symbolic bounded model check-ing, hand-encoded SMT-LIB v2 — into a single build-system-enforced agreement judgement. The meta-logic is operational rather than denotational (the meta-judgement is “every wired kernel closed every cited theorem under no admitted axioms,” and the rule of inference is “if the build is green, the agreement holds”), but the architectural intent is the same as a traditional meta-logical framework: provide a substrate in which trust composition across proof systems is a first-class object that the system reasons about explicitly. 12 Build-Time Gates (Citation Verification Task) 

Yes No 

Transitive dep  Blocks 

Gradle dep wires  coqCheck task feeds log 

afterEvaluate hook 

Coq Spec Layer (specs/coq/CandidateLogContainsCommitted.v) 

Theorem candidate_log_contains_committed_axiom : ... 

Print Assumptions candidate_log_contains_committed_axiom. 

==> Closed under the global context 

Gradle Build Layer (mercury-themis/build.gradle.kts) 

tla.registerCoqExternalCitation( 

name = CandidateLogContainsCommitted, 

tlaSpec = ChronosRaftProofs, 

theoremName = CandidateLogContainsCommittedAxiom, 

coqSpec = CandidateLogContainsCommitted, 

coqTheorem = candidate_log_contains_committed_axiom, 

tlapsTaskPath = :mercury-chronos-raft:tlapsProveRaft, 

coqCheckTaskPath = :mercury-themis:coqCheckCandidateLogContainsCommitted, 

tlaProofFile = specs/raft/ChronosRaftProofs.tla) 

TLA+ Spec Layer (specs/raft/ChronosRaftProofs.tla) 

THEOREM CandidateLogContainsCommittedAxiom == ASSUME ... PROVE ... 

PROOF OMITTED \\* CITED: specs/coq/CandidateLogContainsCommitted.v#candidate_log_contains_committed_axiom 

Gate 1: grep tlaProofFile for ^THEOREM theoremName + 'CITED:' tag 

Gate 2: grep build/coq/coqSpec/coq.log for 'coqTheorem' + 'Closed under the global context' (5-line window) 

Gate 3: write build/coq-external-citation/<name>/citation-report.txt 

Either gate FAILED? 

throw GradleException — build FAILS LOUD 

citation OK — TLAPS run proceeds 

./gradlew :mercury-chronos-raft:tlapsProveRaft Figure 2. Cross-backend citation primitive flow. The TLA+ spec layer declares an OMITTED theorem with a structured CITED: tag pointing at the external kernel’s theorem. The Gradle build layer’s 

tla.registerCoqExternalCitation(...) DSL wires three build-time gates (Gate 1 grepps the TLA file for the CITED: annotation; Gate 2 grepps the external kernel’s verification log for the closure-confirmation line; Gate 3 writes the citation report). A failure on either gate throws a 

GradleException that blocks the host TLAPS check; success allows the TLAPS run to proceed. 

13 The wiring is a transitive Gradle dependency, so the citation re-checks on every build of the TLAPS check task. 

3.1.3 Dual- and triple-citation gates The primitive composes. A dual-citation gate requires the same TLA+ obligation to be cited against two independent external proof systems (typically Coq and Lean 4), and the build fails if either kernel’s closure regresses. A triple-citation gate adds a third independent axis, typically Apalache symbolic SMT model checking at a fixed length bound, which exercises the obligation under a different verification regime (bounded symbolic model checking) than the deductive Coq and Lean axes. TRIPLE-KERNEL (STRONGEST) 

> DUAL-KERNEL (STRONG)
> epistemic backstop
> epistemic backstop
> Disjoint Failure Properties
> Disjoint proof-state representation
> (Coq Goal vs Lean expression tree)
> Disjoint automation cascade
> (lia/reflexivity/rewrite vs omega/decide/simp)
> Disjoint kernel-axiom basis
> (eq_rect vs propext+Quot.sound)
> Disjoint paradigm
> (deductive proof vs bounded SMT)
> Single-Axis (FRAGILE)
> Apex Axiom
> Coq citation only
> PROVED via 1 backend
> Apex Axiom
> Coq port
> (CIC kernel)
> Lean 4 port
> (Lean kernel — CIC variant)
> AND
> both close
> PROVED via 2 independent kernels
> Apex Axiom
> Coq port
> (CIC kernel)
> Lean 4 port
> (Lean kernel)
> Apalache spec
> (symbolic SMT BMC)
> AND
> all three close
> STRONGEST_EVIDENCE_TRIPLE
> 2 deductive kernels + 1 symbolic BMC

Figure 3. Cross-axis insurance pattern. Single-axis discharge (left, fragile) — one ker-nel/automation bug breaks the chain. Dual-kernel discharge (centre, strong) — Coq’s CIC + Lean 4’s CIC variant must independently close the same theorem; joint failure requires two independent kernel bugs. Triple-kernel discharge (right, strongest) — additionally requires Apalache’s symbolic SMT-encoded bounded model checker to PASS; joint failure requires three independent backend failures across structurally distinct verification paradigms (deductive proof × 2 kernels + bounded symbolic exploration). The disjoint-failure-properties side panel enumerates the four orthogonal failure axes the multi-kernel agreement defends against (proof-state representation, automation cascade, kernel-axiom basis, and verification paradigm). 

The dual-kernel gate’s epistemic value is that a single-kernel soundness regression — a Coq stdlib axiom shift, a Lean kernel reduction bug, an automation-cascade unsoundness — cannot break a dual-cited theorem because the other kernel would catch the regression as a disagreement. 

3.1.4 Correspondence certificates and the distinction from embedding approaches The citation primitive’s trust regime includes a correspondence certificate — a human-authored claim that the cited external theorem is semantically equivalent to the TLAPS obligation it discharges. We name it explicitly because it is a first-class component of the architecture’s trust base, distinct from (and not subsumed by) the kernel-level closure assertion that the build-system gate checks. The closure check answers did the external kernel close the cited theorem under no admitted axioms? ;the correspondence certificate answers the prior question, is the cited external theorem actually a 

14 re-statement of the TLAPS obligation? The architecture treats this layer as a named open problem (section 6.3); section 5.5 reports a case in which cross-axis exploration caught a correspondence mismatch (the LogPositionTermMatchAxiom global-versus-local scope divergence), demonstrating that the multi-axis architecture partially checks the correspondence layer empirically even without a mechanised certificate. The closest published precedent to the citation primitive is Bythos (Zhao et al. 2024), which embeds TLA’s temporal operators into Coq via CoFixpoint constructs and proves the embedded-TLA propositions in Coq directly. The two approaches share the goal of moving epistemic content across the TLA / external-kernel boundary, but the architectures differ: • Bythos embeds TLA semantics into Coq . The TLA semantics are encoded as a Coq library (CoFixpoint definitions for temporal operators, CoInductive types for traces), and the TLA proof obligations are discharged inside the Coq proof system as proofs about that encoding. Soundness rests on the faithfulness of the Coq encoding plus the soundness of Coq’s kernel. The TLA-to-Coq encoding is itself the (whole-language) correspondence certificate, discharged once and shared across all embedded-TLA obligations. • The citation primitive leaves TLA in TLAPS . The TLA semantics remain in TLAPS’s set-theoretic encoding, the TLAPS obligation is marked OMITTED \* CITED: , and the build system is the meta-system that ensures the cited external theorem closes and remains cited. Soundness rests on the per-obligation correspondence certificate (currently human-asserted) plus the soundness of both kernels for their respective theorems. The two approaches are complementary rather than competing — a Bythos-style embedding could in principle be cited from a TLAPS proof via the primitive — but the engineering trade-offs differ. Embedding requires the external kernel to model TLA semantics faithfully, an investment that pays off when many obligations are cited against the same kernel and that, once made, retires the per-obligation correspondence-certificate concern. The citation primitive requires only a per-obligation sister theorem and a per-obligation correspondence certificate, an investment that pays off when the obligations are heterogeneous in shape across kernels and verification paradigms. The validation campaign of section 4 used the citation primitive because the obligations span temporal, propositional, arithmetic, quantifier-bounded, and probabilistic shapes that no single embedding can cover — and the architecture pays for that breadth with the open mechanisation problem of section 6.3. 

3.2 Cross-axis convergence matrix 

The cross-axis convergence matrix records per-obligation verdicts across N independent verifiers and composes them into kernel-agreement gates. The agreement is operational — a build-system-enforced per-axis-PROVED conjunction across all wired axes for each cited apex obligation — and is distinct from a logical soundness theorem (see §6.1 and §6.3). This section describes the matrix’s construction (3.2.1), the axis taxonomy (3.2.2), and the convergence semantics (3.2.3). 

3.2.1 Construction For each cited apex obligation, we attempt verification on every backend that is capable of the obligation’s shape — for example, a recursive-operator obligation is dispatched to Coq (which has Fixpoint ) but not to a saturation prover that cannot represent the recursion. The capability filter is applied per axis per obligation; backends not capable of the shape are reported NOT_APPLICABLE rather than counted as a failure to discharge. For each capable axis, the verdict is one of PROVED (the obligation closes under the axis’s standard verification 15 regime), REFUTED (a counter-example is exhibited), TIMEOUT (the axis does not return within a budget), STRUCTURAL_GAP (the axis cannot represent the obligation despite being notionally capable), or VERDICT_DISAGREEMENT (the axis returns a verdict that contradicts another axis’s PROVED). The matrix is regenerated on a schedule by an auto-tooling pass that enumerates the wired citations, invokes each axis’s verdict-extraction protocol, and emits the per-obligation × per-axis grid. 

3.2.2 Axis taxonomy The validation campaign wires sixteen verification backends spanning every major axis of automated reasoning. Fifteen are provisioned via dedicated download tasks at the build-system layer and are smoke-tested by a single aggregate task that confirms each backend’s binary is present and responds to a version-class probe; the sixteenth (Lincheck) is consumed as a Maven dependency. The roster’s breadth is deliberate: each axis carries distinct strengths and distinct failure modes, and the matrix’s epistemic value derives from re-proving the same obligation across maximally disjoint kernels and decision procedures. We organise the roster along five categories. 

Deductive proof systems . Four backends are deductive proof assistants: TLAPS (the host system, with its Zenon → Isabelle → SMT cascade (Chaudhuri et al. 2010; Cousineau et al. 2012; Bonichon et al. 2007)); Coq with coqchk (the primary cross-axis insurance, providing a CIC-based repre-sentation distinct from TLAPS’s set-theoretic encoding, with the Coquelicot real-analysis stdlib extension for obligations involving Riemann integrals); Lean 4 with Mathlib (Moura and Ullrich 2021; The mathlib Community 2020) (Coq insurance through a different automation cascade and a different proof-state representation); and Why3 (Filliâtre and Paskevich 2013) (a multi-prover frontend with a verified-extraction pathway). 

Bounded model checkers . Two backends: TLC (Yu et al. 1999) (the canonical TLA+ explicit-state model checker) and Apalache (Konnov et al. 2019) (a bounded symbolic SMT-backed model checker requiring Snowcat type annotations). 

SMT and saturation provers . Reachable via the TLAPS BY cascade or via the standalone Z3 axis: Z3 (Moura and Bjørner 2008), cvc4 (Barrett et al. 2011), cvc5 (Barbosa et al. 2022), veriT (Bouton et al. 2009), SPASS (Weidenbach et al. 2009), Vampire, Eprover, and Zipperposition (Cruanes and Zipperposition contributors 2021). 

Probabilistic model checkers . PRISM (Kwiatkowska et al. 2002, 2011) is a continuous-time-Markov-chain model checker that discharges liveness conjectures whose unbounded form depends on ran-domized scheduling that the deductive axes cannot mechanise directly. 

Production-language verifiers . Two backends operate directly on production code rather than on separate specifications: CBMC (Clarke et al. 2004) is a bounded model checker for ANSI-C and C++ used to verify FFM-wrapped native libraries; Lincheck (Koval et al. 2023) is a JVM lineariz-ability checker for concurrent data structures. These two production-language axes share a property the specification-level axes lack: they verify the implementation rather than the specification, eliminating the implementation-specification di-vergence failure mode that haunts mechanically-checked-spec-but-hand-coded-implementation ver-ification artefacts. 16 3.2.3 Convergence semantics The convergence histogram for the validation campaign’s cross-axis matrix at the present configuration is reported in section 5.3. The matrix records eighteen cited apex axioms × ten effective verification axes, with per-axiom convergence ranging from three axes (the floor for cited apex axioms in the present configuration) to eight axes (the ceiling, achieved by 

LogMatchingLocalAxiom as the gold-standard exemplar). The matrix’s semantic posture distinguishes it from Why3’s per-verification-condition × per-prover verdict table (Bobot et al. 2011), the closest published precedent for per-obligation × per-backend reporting. Why3’s table records per-VC × per-prover verdicts within a single source language (WhyML) and a single verification paradigm (SMT/ATP cascade), and its discharge semantics are 

disjunctive at the prover layer — any prover closing the VC suffices, and confidence-from-diversity is an informal IDE-side observation. The matrix described here records per-axis verdicts across structurally disjoint verification paradigms (deductive proof × bounded symbolic model checking 

× probabilistic model checking × production-language checking) and source languages spanning TLA+, Coq Gallina, Lean 4, WhyML, SMT-LIB v2, C, and JVM bytecode; selected apex axioms are then composed into conjunctive dual- and triple-citation kernel-agreement gates (section 3.1.3, with 14 of 18 cited apex axioms at dual-gate and 3 at triple-gate in the present configuration per section 5.3). The extension is from intra-paradigm intra-language disjunctive verdict-aggregation to cross-paradigm cross-language conjunctive agreement-gating on the cited apex subset, with the build-system enforcing the agreement (section 3.1.2) rather than an out-of-band IDE view. 

3.3 AI-orchestrated mass-parallel dispatch Design principle. AI agents are not proof authorities in this architecture; they operate strictly below the trust boundary maintained by proof-assistant kernels and CI citation gates. An agent may propose a proof, attempt a port, or report a negative result; it may not attest that a theorem has been verified. Verification authority resides at the kernel-directive and CI-gated-citation layer — the established Print Assumptions directive in Coq (shipped since Coq 8.5 in 2016, used as an end-of-development audit gate in Common-Criteria-adjacent verified-software submissions), the analogous #print axioms in Lean 4, Why3 prover-cascade closure, Apalache SMT-encoded counter-example exhaustion, CBMC VERIFICATION SUCCESSFUL , and the corresponding closure assertions for each wired backend (per §1.3 and §3.1.1, the per-kernel directives are established practice in their respective communities; the composition under the build-system-gated citation primitive of section 3.1.2 is the novel contribution). This separation is load-bearing: it allows the dispatch protocol to scale agent parallelism without expanding the trusted computing base. The protocol that operationalises the separation — the honest-negative discipline — is the subject of section 3.3.3. The dispatch protocol fans out N autonomous specialist agents — one per verifier or one per obligation — coordinated by a single survey-and-route agent that infers the appropriate backend per obligation and dispatches in waves with disjoint file-touch zones. This section describes the topology (3.3.1), the speedup mechanisms (3.3.2), and the honest-negative discipline (3.3.3). 

3.3.1 Topology The protocol has a single coordinator and N specialists. The coordinator sur-veys verification gaps (typically by parsing a shared finding-tracker that records the campaign’s open obligations), infers the appropriate backend(s) for each obligation by static signal (recursive operator → Coq with Fixpoint ; bounded-quantifier SMT → standalone Z3 with hand-encoded SMT-LIB v2; high-arity clauses → SPASS or Vampire; higher-order content → Zipperposition; randomized scheduling → PRISM CTMC), and dispatches specialists in waves with disjoint file-17 touch zones. The backend-inference step is speculative (section 3.3.2 mechanism 2): when the static signal is ambiguous between multiple capable backends, the coordinator races them in parallel and accepts the first kernel-confirmed PROVED verdict. Each specialist runs to completion within a per-task budget (typically four to eight hours of wallclock for a single obligation), returns either PROVED or NEGATIVE_RESULT, and the coordinator aggregates the per-wave verdicts into the campaign-level finding-tracker. A NEGATIVE_RESULT triggers cross-routing: the coordinator re-dispatches the obligation to a different axis selected by the obstacle’s structural signal. The validation campaign of section 4 deployed twenty specialist agents across four parallel waves coordinated by a single coordinator agent (Figure 4). The specialist roster covered every wired backend. Wave 4 — X+Y+Z+Pub (4 specialists)  

> Sister axiom recovery survey
> Dual-kernel gate negative test
> TLAPS multi-backend SMT cascade
> Publication artefacts
> Wave 3 — Specs (7 specialists)
> Coq vs Lean equivalence
> Pathway 2 deliverable
> Verified-Raft precedent comparison
> External-validation bundle
> TLC bound-scaling quantification
> Cross-axis matrix refresh
> Claim doc auto-updater
> Wave 2 — Options (6 specialists)
> Coq port equivalence audit
> Coq-bridge expansion (14 →5)
> Cross-axis convergence verifier
> Verification dashboard auto-regen
> PRISM execution sweep
> Parameterization audit
> Wave 1 — Pathways (3 specialists)
> Coq lift specialist
> 9/11 lifted
> Lean port specialist
> 86 thm / 0 sorryAx
> TLAPS direct specialist
> 1 deferred · 16 blocked
> Coordinator agent
> single-session orchestrator
> surveys gaps · infers backend per shape · dispatches
> Aggregate per-wave verdicts
> back to coordinator
> Per-axis verdict matrix
> ASSUME *Axiom census: 26
> →0
> (historic zero, 17 active hours)

Figure 4. AI-orchestrated mass-parallel dispatch DAG instantiated for the validation campaign on 2026-04-26. A single coordinator agent dispatches twenty specialists across four parallel waves with disjoint file-touch zones — Wave 1 Pathways (Coq lift / Lean port / TLAPS direct), Wave 2 Options (Coq port equivalence audit / bridge expansion / cross-axis verifier / dashboard auto-regen / PRISM sweep / parameterization audit), Wave 3 Specs (Coq–Lean equivalence / Pathway 2 deliverable / precedent comparison / external-validation bundle / TLC bound-scaling / matrix refresh / claim doc auto-updater), and Wave 4 X+Y+Z+Pub (sister axiom recovery survey / dual-kernel gate negative test / multi-backend SMT cascade / publication artefacts). Per-wave verdicts aggregate back to the coordinator; the campaign-level output is the per-axis verdict matrix recording the 26 

→ 0 ASSUME Axiom census closure. Per-wave parallelism is empirically bounded at six-to-seven 18 concurrent specialists by shared-state contention on the build script and version-control index.* The protocol is structurally distinct from the LLM plan-then-execute lineage (The LangChain Team 2023; Wang et al. 2023) in two architectural respects. First, the response to a NEGA-TIVE_RESULT is cross-axis re-dispatch rather than within-tool retry-or-replanning: rather than re-attempting the original backend’s approach with the same kernel, the coordinator routes the obligation to a structurally different verification axis selected by the obstacle’s structural signal — extending plan-then-execute decomposition from intra-tool execution to per-step inter-tool re-dispatch across a kernel roster. Second, the routing signal is a kernel-emitted PROVED or NEGA-TIVE_RESULT under a Print Assumptions -class closure assertion, not an LLM self-assessment of step success — extending the process-reward-model intuition (Lightman et al. 2023) from per-step LLM judgement to per-step kernel verdict. The cross-routing edge is what couples the dispatch fan-out to the honest-negative discipline of section 3.3.3 and prevents the failure mode — common to unverified plan-execute loops — in which an unverified-but-plausible plan progresses to completion. 

3.3.2 Speedup mechanisms Four reinforcing mechanisms compose to compress the campaign wallclock budget. 

The cross-backend citation primitive (mechanism 1). For obligations within the primitive’s scope, the per-axiom wallclock collapses from the thirty-to-forty-hour traditional estimate to the thirty-four-second Coq median observed in the validation campaign benchmark. The reduction is approx-imately three orders of magnitude per axiom for the bridge-eligible cohort. 

Parallel speculative execution, AI-assisted (mechanism 2). When an obligation can be dispatched to multiple capable backends but the operator does not know in advance which will succeed first, the precedent strategy is sequential trial — try one backend, fall back to the next on failure. The closest proof-search-side precedent for parallel multi-prover racing is Isabelle’s Sledgehammer (Paulson and Blanchette 2010), which dispatches an Isabelle goal to several external ATPs in parallel and accepts the first kernel-reconstructable result — within a single source language (HOL) and a single trust base (the Isabelle kernel re-derives every accepted step). We instead adopt the eager / multi-path 

sub-category of speculative execution — the CPU-architecture lineage of Disjoint Eager Execution (Uht et al. 1995), Threaded Multiple Path Execution (Wallace et al. 1998), PolyPath, and Selective Eager Execution, which execute multiple alternative paths in parallel and commit the first valid result — and apply it to proof search across structurally disjoint kernels and source languages: a 

cross-axis race orchestrator dispatches all capable backends in parallel for the same theorem via a single dispatch task, accepts the first kernel-confirmed PROVED verdict, and terminates the others. (The dispatch is from t=0; this is distinct from latency-tail mitigation patterns such as Dean and Barroso’s hedged request (Dean and Barroso 2013), where the duplicate is delayed by a percentile-bounded interval.) The AI coordinator’s contribution is the speculation policy — the static-signal inference that decides which backend subset to race for a given obligation shape (recursive-operator obligations race Coq + Lean rather than Apalache; bounded-quantifier obligations race standalone Z3 + Why3 cascade; etc.) — so the speculative fan-out is selective rather than indiscriminate. On a multi-core development machine the cost of running several provers concurrently is bounded by the hardware envelope rather than by the sum of per-prover wallclocks; the empirical effect is that the campaign’s per-obligation wallclock equals the fastest backend rather than the slowest , with the AI policy avoiding the indiscriminate-fan-out cost trap. The CPU-architecture analogy is structural rather than literal : CPU speculation retires branches on resolved branch-prediction (the speculative path either becomes architecturally visible or is squashed), whereas the dispatch primitive commits 

the first kernel-confirmed PROVED verdict and terminates the others — the parallel-paths-with-19 first-valid-result topology is shared, the architectural-state semantics are not, and a hardware-architecture reviewer should not over-extend the analogy to imply equivalent retirement / rollback semantics. 

The verification-speed cache stack (mechanism 3). Per-backend verdict caching keyed on the content hash of the specification plus its transitive dependencies allows a no-op rebuild to skip every verifier invocation; cache hits dominate iteration cycles in which a single specification is being refined while siblings are stable. The Lean Mathlib slice cache is structurally distinct: rather than caching per-specification verdicts, it batches all Lean specifications into a single lake build invocation and serves per-specification results from a per-cohort cache, reducing the per-specification slice-step wallclock by approximately three orders of magnitude. 

The AI-coordinator-and-specialist topology (mechanism 4). The empirical wallclock reduction rela-tive to a hypothetical sequential single-specialist baseline is approximately fifteen to twenty times under the conflict-aware dispatch protocol. The peak observed parallelism is six to seven concur-rent specialists per wave; beyond that, shared-state contention on the Gradle build script and the version-control index degrades throughput. The four mechanisms do not compose multiplicatively in the strict mathematical sense — the per-mechanism factors are not independent, because the bridge primitive’s per-axiom collapse subsumes some of the cache-stack and race-orchestrator wins for the bridge-eligible cohort. The empirical campaign-level signature reported at the §5.2 comparator triad is ≈ 60 × against the team’s prior Path-A.2 TLAPS ghost-composition baseline (§5.2.2; author-prior ), with within-method (§5.2.1; 

author-generated , ≈ 50–60 × against a same-team serial estimate — see the §5.2.1 selection-bias dis-closure) and cross-precedent IronFleet (§5.2.3; independent-published under three scope qualifiers) comparators triangulating the same direction-of-effect at different baseline-source classes. 

3.3.3 Honest-negative discipline The discipline that distinguishes an autonomous verification fleet from a hallucination factory is the honest-negative protocol : every specialist is instructed to return NEGATIVE_RESULT (with structured failure-mode disclosure) rather than fabricate a plausible-but-unverified result. The validation campaign’s documented NEGATIVE_RESULT artefacts include the ParentLogTypingAxiom direct-TLAPS-attempt deferral at the eight-to-fifteen-hour estimate (which the coordinator cross-routed via the Coq bridge primitive in under two hours), the Apalache <dynamic> integer-range encoding limit on three SMT-symbolic verifications (which the coordinator cross-routed to Coq’s Fixpoint recursive operators), and the PRISM model-bug cluster initially classified as five FAIL verdicts and reclassified post hoc as TIER-B model-abstraction bugs after root-cause analysis. The honest-negative protocol is what makes the speedup mechanisms epistemically reliable rather than merely fast. A campaign that reported only successes would be indistinguishable from a campaign that hallucinated successes; the honest-negative discipline forces every dispatched spe-cialist to surface what it could not close, which the coordinator then cross-routes to a structurally appropriate alternative. 

3.4 Algorithmic correctness vs annotation depth 

The cross-axis matrix records cross-axis convergence on annotated theorems . The methodological scope of the matrix is the annotation layer, not the algorithmic foundation, and the distinction is load-bearing for honest epistemic accounting. 20 The algorithmic correctness chain for a verified subsystem comprises three components: 1. A TLA+ specification of the subsystem’s invariants and transition relation. 2. A TLAPS proof against that specification, in which the inductive invariant is established and the safety and liveness obligations are discharged either directly or via the cross-backend citation primitive. 3. A runtime SpecBridge::Invariants hook that asserts the proved invariants against live state during unit tests. The hook is compile-time-generated from the cited TLA+ specs by an annotation processor with spec-hash-keyed regeneration; section 4.4 describes the codegen pipeline, the dispatch patterns, and the production-cost tier policy. The algorithmic correctness chain is load-bearing for the soundness claim: the production code’s behaviour must satisfy the proved invariants because the runtime hook fires assertions on every unit test run. The cross-axis chorus that surrounds each apex axiom is a structurally distinct contribution. The chorus comprises additional kernel ports of the cited theorem (Coq, Lean, Why3, Apalache, Z3-standalone, CBMC), each independently verifying the cited claim under its own kernel and (for the dual- and triple-citation gates) under build-system-enforced agreement with the others. The chorus is additional epistemic redundancy on the annotation layer , not the algorithmic foundation. A regression in any single chorus axis — a Lean kernel bug, a Why3 prover-cascade timeout, a CBMC encoding gap — does not invalidate the algorithmic claim because the algorithmic chain remains intact. This distinction matters for honest epistemic accounting. Where this paper reports residual stub markers in axis-port files (the annotation layer), the residual is in the annotation depth, not in the algorithmic correctness chain. The catalogue of recurring compromises in section 2.5 critiques precedents whose algorithmic chain depends on a single backend; the method’s contribution is to make both layers (algorithmic and annotation) cross-axis-redundant, with the annotation layer’s redundancy being the visible empirical headline and the algorithmic layer’s redundancy being the load-bearing soundness argument. Figure 5 sketches the relationship between the two layers. 21 LOAD-BEARING SOUNDNESS CHAIN — every link required for the soundness claim  

> ANNOTATION LAYER — cross-axis chorus (additional epistemic redundancy)
> gates cited apex theorems disjoint-trust-base insurance
> per-apex ports (each independently re-proves the cited apex)
> Coq
> CIC + coqchk
> Lean 4
> CIC + Mathlib
> Why3
> multi-prover
> Apalache
> symbolic BMC
> Z3-standalone
> SMT-LIB v2
> CBMC
> C/C++ BMC
> Cross-axis convergence matrix
> (per-obligation × per-axis verdicts;
> dual- and triple-citation gates)
> Cross-backend citation primitive (build-system gate: Print Assumptions / #print axioms re-checked on every commit)
> 1. TLA+ specification
> invariants + transition relation
> 2. TLAPS proof
> inductive invariant;
> obligations discharged
> directly or via citation
> 3. Runtime SpecBridge hook
> SpecMonitorProcessor codegen;
> spec-hash regen prevents drift;
> fires on every unit-test PR gate
> Regression in any single chorus axis (Lean kernel bug, Why3 cascade timeout, CBMC encoding gap)
> does NOT invalidate the algorithmic claim — the load-bearing chain remains intact.
> Production code's behaviour MUST satisfy the proved invariants —
> the runtime hook fires on every test; the test gates every commit.

Figure 5. Algorithmic correctness chain vs annotation depth — the two-layer model of the federated architecture’s epistemic structure. The load-bearing soundness chain (green, bottom) is a three-link sequence — TLA+ specification → TLAPS proof → SpecMonitorProcessor-generated 

SpecBridge::Invariants runtime hook — every link of which is required for the soundness claim. The runtime hook fires assertions on every unit-test execution that gates every pull request, so production-code behaviour must satisfy the proved invariants by construction. The annotation layer (amber, top) is a chorus of per-apex ports across structurally distinct verification paradigms (deductive Coq + Lean + Why3; bounded symbolic Apalache; hand-encoded SMT-LIB v2 dispatched to standalone Z3; production-language CBMC on the C reference implementation), composed by the build-system-gated cross-backend citation primitive (purple, middle) into a cross-axis convergence matrix that enforces dual- and triple-kernel agreement on cited apex theorems. The annotation layer is additional epistemic redundancy , not the algorithmic foundation: a regression in any single chorus axis — a Lean kernel bug, a Why3 cascade timeout, a CBMC encoding gap — does not invalidate the algorithmic claim because the load-bearing chain remains intact. The catalogue of recurring compromises in section 2.5 critiques precedents whose algorithmic chain depends on a single backend; the federated architecture’s contribution is to make both layers cross-axis-redundant, with the annotation layer’s redundancy as the visible empirical headline and the algorithmic layer’s redundancy as the load-bearing soundness argument. 

22 4. Validation: two subsystems, one method 

The architecture’s three primary mechanisms — citation primitive, convergence matrix, dispatch protocol — apply to both consensus and financial-arithmetic invariant verification with no method-ological customisation. Section 4.1 motivates the cross-subsystem application. Section 4.2 reports the Raft consensus validation. Section 4.3 reports the matching-engine financial-arithmetic val-idation. Section 4.4 closes the implementation-specification gap via the SpecBridge::Invariants compile-time codegen layer. 

4.1 Why both subsystems 

The two validation subsystems sit at opposite ends of the formal-methods literature. Distributed consensus is well-trodden territory dating to Lamport’s foundational TLA+ work (Lamport 1994, 2002) and the IronFleet, Verdi, and MongoRaftReconfig publication arc surveyed in section 2. The bug classes are catastrophic-but-rare: liveness violations, split-brain, committed-entry loss. The verification of consensus is justified on a worst-case-impact basis, and the precedent literature is substantial. Matching-engine financial-arithmetic verification is comparatively rare. The bug classes differ from consensus’s: arithmetic underflow, fee rounding, partial-fill cost divergence, automated-market-maker constant-product invariant violation. The bugs are low-impact-per-occurrence but high-aggregate-impact at high-frequency-trading throughput. Both subsystems can lose money. Both run in the same JVM process in the production deployment. Both classes of obligation must be discharged for a complete economic-correctness claim — a verified Raft on top of a buggy matching engine has the same trading impact as an unverified Raft on top of a correct matching engine. The method’s cross-subsystem application is therefore not optional decoration; it is a precondition for the soundness argument the production deployment requires. 

4.2 Raft consensus validation 

The validation subsystem covers Mercury’s Raft consensus implementation with full algorithmic scope: joint consensus, leadership transfer, log compaction, linearizable client reads, and dynamic reconfiguration. The TLAPS proof tree exceeds eleven thousand lines; the cited apex axiom set in the present configuration is eighteen axioms. The validation campaign’s empirical signature on Raft is a four-tuple zero-status: zero remaining 

ASSUME *Axiom declarations in the Raft proof tree, zero remaining bare OMITTED proof obliga-tions, zero counter-examples discovered by any wired backend, and zero Admitted , Axiom , or non-docstring sorry markers in the Coq and Lean files cited from Raft proofs. The campaign also closes the IronFleet-parity five-of-five liveness criterion: each of the five canonical Raft liveness properties (EventuallyConfigCommitted , EventuallyAllLogsConverge , PersistedLogIsAttractor , Even-tuallyConfigChangePendingClears , LeaderLogIsMonotonic ) is mechanically discharged end-to-end across two-or-more independent verification axes. We flag here, by forward-reference, that the cross-axis matrix’s falsifiability posture is exercised on this validation subsystem: section 5.5 reports the LogPositionTermMatchAxiom global-versus-local correspondence catch — an Apalache symbolic exploration produced a six-step counter-example to the unconditional form that the cited Coq theorem’s local restriction did not rule out, and the architecture’s response (hypothesis-strengthening the TLA+ statement to match the discharged scope) is itself the existence-proof that the kernel-agreement gate catches divergences single-kernel 23 discharge would have left invisible. The validation campaign is therefore not only an existence-proof of successful application but also an existence-proof of failure-detection by the architecture’s cross-axis machinery. The IronFleet-parity closure mechanism diverges from IronFleet’s by structural necessity: TLAPS’s tlapm 1.6.0-pre LS4 propositional-temporal-logic backend rejects the temporal composition []A ∧

[]B ⇒ [](A ∧ B) after multiple documented restructuring attempts, so four of the five properties achieve dual deductive closure under TLAPS plus Coq (TLAPS proves a per-state safety induction; Coq proves the temporal composition). The fifth property closes under bounded TLAPS proof together with a PRISM continuous-time-Markov-chain probabilistic discharge for the unbounded form, where the unbounded liveness depends on a randomized election timeout that any deductive treatment of the property must also represent probabilistically. We highlight both closures as concrete instances of the federated architecture (section 1.3) working as intended. The TLAPS-plus-Coq dual closure is the same obligation discharged by two structurally distinct backends across the per-state safety / temporal composition split — Coq picks up exactly the proof-shape class (PTL temporal composition) that TLAPS’s LS4 backend cannot represent natively. The PRISM closure is similarly the right backend for the proof shape — deductive proof systems cannot naturally express the probability measure over schedules that the randomized-election-timeout liveness property requires; PRISM can. Both closures would be impossible in a single-backend posture; both are routine under the federated architecture because the dispatch protocol routes by proof shape and the citation primitive composes the verdicts back into a single TLAPS-level proof tree. This is also one of the architectural answers to the “liveness deferral” compromise of section 2.5 — the architecture closes liveness obligations precedent single-backend campaigns abandon for structural rather than methodological reasons. 

4.3 Matching-engine financial-arithmetic validation 

The validation subsystem covers Mercury’s Themis matching engine with five numeric canonicals — Pow10Lookup , Notional , UFP32 , FundingRate , ScaledPrice — that mediate every pricing, fee, automated-market-maker, and funding computation. Each canonical achieves cross-axis discharge across six independent backends — Coq, Lean 4, Why3, Apalache symbolic, CBMC bounded model checking on the C reference implementation, and standalone Z3 hand-encoded SMT-LIB v2 — with the canonical’s per-axis port file resident in the canonical-tier source directory and (for the deductive axes) carrying a closed Print Assumptions or #print axioms status. The matching-engine settlement layer carries an additional broad TLAPS proof tree that continues to expand under the same methodology beyond the paper’s reproducibility-tag snapshot. The Treasury Phase B proof modules — ThemisAmmDustAccountingProofs.tla (DustConservation, bounded-divisor, typing and non-negativity corollaries), ThemisAmmCostFromFloorProofs.tla 

(per-leg cost-from-floor invariant and per-user zero-sum closure), and ThemisTreasuryFailsafe-Proofs.tla (multi-engine sequencer-side dedup keyed by (asset, slot)) — together discharge approx-imately 1,720 TLAPS obligations across three sister-spec files. The CanonicalCarrierStrategy 

apex contributes a further 655 obligations closing two apex theorems ( StrategyRefImmutable and 

CarrierKindAgreesWithReferenceData ) via deductive PROOF with sister-spec inductive carrier. The HISTORIC ZERO bare-OMITTED status across the Themis specification tree is preserved across both extensions, indicating that the dispatch protocol and citation primitive scale through contin-uing application rather than requiring per-cycle re-engineering. A worked production-impact case study illustrates the practical value. During the canonical refac-24 tor that produced the six-axis chorus discharge, the cross-axis exploration of the perp-funding settlement path exposed a missing scale narrowing operator between the funding-rate canonical and the per-account funding accrual emission. The omission would have produced a 10 12 over-charge of accrued funding under specific ordering conditions in production. The bug was caught by a SpecMonitorProcessor -generated SpecBridge::Invariants assertion in a unit test that fired on real fixture data after the canonical refactor surfaced the missing narrowing step (the generation layer is described in section 4.4). Root-cause analysis traced the divergence to a per-call-site re-derivation of the narrowing constant that had silently drifted from the canonical’s source-of-truth value. The bug class — silent multiplicative scale mismatch in a financial-arithmetic layer — is structurally invisible to the spec-driven verification campaigns of the precedent literature, none of which model a financial-arithmetic layer with mechanically-checked numeric invariants. 

4.4 SpecBridge::Invariants — closing the implementation-specification gap by codegen 

The SpecBridge::Invariants runtime hook layer is the operational realisation of the implementation-versus-specification gap closure described in section 2.5. The layer extends the federated architec-ture across the implementation boundary: a sister codegen pipeline mirrors the citation primitive’s build-system gate at the TLA+ → Java translation step, so the architecture’s drift-resistance property holds end-to-end from the TLA+ spec through the Coq / Lean / Why3 / etc. axes to the production code path. The layer is realised as a Java annotation processor — SpecMonitorProcessor — that runs at com-pile time. The processor’s @SupportedAnnotationTypes set is SpecInvariants , SpecRefinement ,and SpecCrossClassInvariant (with its Container ); a production class declares its participation through two class-level annotations and a tier-policy enum value. @SpecModel({"specs/themis-events/SnapshotConsumerGapPolicy.tla"}) cites the TLA+ specs that govern the class (the processor reads .tla paths only and auto-derives the matching .cfg companion from the path; supplying a .cfg value triggers a compile error). @SpecInvariants({"InvariantNameA", "In-variantNameB"}) names the invariants the runtime monitor should verify; its tier() element is typed SpecTier , a Java enum whose three values select the per-invariant failure policy ( TEST_-ONLY throws AssertionError ; SAMPLED — the default — increments a violation counter and rate-limits an SLF4J WARN per the Mercury metric pattern; HOT_PATH is counter-only). The processor parses the cited specs via MercurySpecLoader , extracts the named invariants via MercuryInvari-antExtractor (with body extraction via MercuryInvariantBodyExtractor ), translates the TLA+ invariant expressions to Java verifier methods via InvariantTranslator , and emits a <Class-Name>Invariants.java companion with one verifyXxx(instance) method per named invariant plus a verifyAll(instance) aggregator. The processor additionally embeds a // SPEC-HASH: <sha> header into the generated file, computed over the cited spec / config contents; editing a cited 

.tla or .cfg invalidates the hash and forces regeneration on the next compile, so the generated verifiers cannot drift from the cited spec without the operator noticing the regenerated diff. The mechanisation extent is therefore: the TLA+ → Java translation is compile-time-generated 

from the cited specs, not hand-coded per class. The residual gap is the InvariantTranslator ’s translation rules themselves, which are human-authored (and unit-tested via InvariantTransla-torTest ) — the mechanisation of those rules is named as future work in section 6.4. The layer is structurally analogous to the citation primitive of section 3.1: where the citation primitive uses a Gradle gate to enforce drift-resistance across the spec / external-kernel boundary, the SpecMon-25 itorProcessor uses a spec-hash gate to enforce drift-resistance across the spec / production-Java boundary. Both gates fail loud at build time on any drift; both are run on every commit; both keep the operator’s attestation step out of the trust regime. Production code dispatches to the generated verifiers in one of two patterns. The direct pattern calls the generated verifyAll(this) aggregator from a sentinel point on the relevant code path and lets the per-invariant SpecTier decide cost: TEST_ONLY invariants throw AssertionError on violation; 

SAMPLED (the default) accumulates a counter and rate-limits an SLF4J WARN ; HOT_PATH only up-dates a counter. The registry-mediated pattern uses @SpecInvariants(state = "AMM_SWAP_EXE-CUTED") to register the generated verifiers against a named state on SpecHookRegistry at static-init time; production code then dispatches via assert SpecHookRegistry.fireState("AMM_SWAP_EX-ECUTED", this) , which is caller-transparent — adding a new invariant to the same state does not require editing the production site. Java’s assert mechanism elides the registry-pattern dispatch entirely under -da (assertions disabled in production), while the direct-pattern dispatch executes unconditionally per the tier policy. The assertion-failure paths fire only in the test environment, where they gate every pull request. The layer surfaced the first real production defect that the formal-verification chain caught: the matching engine’s automated-market-maker pricing computation was using the full-bucket cost while clamping the base movement to the remaining quantity on a partial fill — two different computations of the same quantity, one wrong. The generated verifyXxx companion fired an assertion error on first deployment against a real test fixture. Testing alone had not caught the bug; the mathematical invariant did. The 10 12 perp-funding over-charge described in section 4.3 was caught via the same layer, by an assertion fired on a real fixture after the canonical refactor surfaced the missing narrowing step. The cross-subsystem application uses the same generation pattern uniformly. The Raft consensus subsystem’s auto-translation tests in mercury-chronos-raft exercise the generated verifiers for the 

RaftNode -bound invariants and the reconfiguration sub-protocol via RaftNodeSpecHookInvari-antsAutoTranslationTest and RaftReconfigSpecHookInvariantsAutoTranslationTest ; the Themis matching engine’s auto-translation tests in mercury-themis and the per-canonical tests in mercury-numeric exercise the generated verifiers for balance-store, automated-market-maker pool management, lock-cost tracking, settlement-stage, option-lock-formula, and the five numeric canonicals. The same SpecMonitorProcessor infrastructure carries both subsystems’ generation; no per-subsystem framework variation is required. The closest published precedent for the annotation-driven spec-to-runtime-check codegen pattern is Frama-C’s E-ACSL plugin (Delahaye et al. 2013; Kosmatov et al. 2013), which translates E-ACSL specification annotations on C source into runtime-checked assertions via source-to-source translation, with optimised memory-monitoring instrumentation for the runtime tracking. The architectural intent is shared: mechanise the spec-to-runtime-check translation rather than hand-code it per class. The differences are at the source-language layer (TLA+ specs cited from a Java class via @SpecModel versus E-ACSL annotations co-located with the C source), the target-language layer (a Java annotation processor that emits a compile-time companion class versus a C source-to-source rewrite), and the drift-resistance mechanism (the spec-hash-keyed regeneration described above versus annotation-driven re-translation on each E-ACSL pass). The InvariantTranslator ’s translation rules remain human-authored on both sides; the present layer’s residual gap is the same gap E-ACSL accepts. 26 5. Performance 

This section reports the empirical performance of the method on the validation campaign. Section 5.1 reports the verification scope achieved. Section 5.2 reports the wallclock benchmark against three reference baselines. Section 5.3 reports the cross-axis convergence matrix empirics. Section 5.4 reports the production-bug-finding empirics. Section 5.5 reports honest negative results. Each numerical claim is associated with a recipe in the reproducibility appendix that produces the claimed value at the published reproducibility tag. 0

> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> Commits per hour  campaign peak: 34 commits
> Total: 263 commits / 17 active hours

Top: commits per hour over the 17-hour single-session campaign window (2026-04-26 UTC)                 

> 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

Hour of day (UTC) 

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> Residual ASSUME *Axiom
> census (count)
> bridge primitive
> deployed at hour 10
> (26 → 16)
> bridge expansion
> at hour 11 (16 → 5)
> single-cycle commit
> HISTORIC ZERO
> at hour 14
> (26 → 0 axioms)

Bottom: residual axiom census per hour — 26 baseline → HISTORIC ZERO at hour 14 

> Median per-axiom Coq wallclock: 34.4 s (Table 2). The campaign's 17 active hours include the bridge-primitive deployment, the bridge-expansion cycle that
> closed 14 axioms in a single-cycle commit, four sibling Coq-port closures, and the final historic-zero closure.

Figure 6. Single-session campaign timeline of the validation campaign on 2026-04-26 — the empir-ical anchor for the wallclock claims of section 5.2. Top panel: commits per hour across the 17-hour active window (263 total commits; campaign peak at hour 13 with 34 commits, when the cross-backend bridge expansion, the Lean ports, the runtime hooks, and the Coq lifts converged in a single dispatch wave). Bottom panel: residual ASSUME *Axiom census per hour. The census stays flat at the 26-axiom baseline through hour 9 (preparatory pathway dispatch and infrastructure landing); the bridge primitive’s first deployment at hour 10 closes 10 axioms (26 → 16); the bridge expansion at hour 11 closes 11 more (16 → 5) in a single-cycle commit; the remaining five axioms close through sustained sibling Coq-port closures and the final AppliedSeqStrictlyIncreasingAxiom closure, reaching HISTORIC ZERO at hour 14. Median per-axiom Coq verification wallclock: 34.4 s (Table 2). 

27 5.1 Verification scope achieved 

The Raft ASSUME *Axiom census on the published source tree carries no remaining citations: zero 

ASSUME declarations of the form <Name>Axiom in the Raft proof tree. The Raft proof tree carries no remaining bare OMITTED proof obligations: every THEOREM discharges via either an explicit TLAPS PROOF block, a PROOF OMITTED \* CITED: annotation pointing to an external proof system whose closure is build-system-gated, or a PROOF OMITTED \* DEDUCTIVE-DISCHARGE-IN-SISTER: 

annotation pointing to a companion specification module whose TLAPS check has run. No counter-example to any cited Raft apex axiom has been discovered by any wired backend. The Coq files cited from Raft proofs carry no Admitted , Axiom , or admit. markers; the Lean files cited from Raft proofs carry no non-docstring sorry markers. The Themis numeric-canonical chorus brings the five canonicals — Pow10Lookup , Notional , UFP32 ,

FundingRate , and ScaledPrice — to six-axis chorus discharge each across Coq, Lean 4, Why3, Apalache symbolic, CBMC bounded model checking, and standalone Z3. The IronFleet-parity five-of-five Raft liveness closure holds (section 4.2). 

5.2 Wallclock benchmark 

The validation campaign’s headline empirical result is the wallclock compression. We report the comparison against three reference baselines: 1. Within-method comparator : the campaign’s own single-specialist sequential estimate (section 5.2.1). 2. Within-shape comparator : the per-axiom Path-A.2 ghost-composition estimate from sibling Raft proofs at similar structural complexity (section 5.2.2). 3. Cross-precedent comparator : the IronFleet IronRSL Paxos campaign’s published person-year cost (section 5.2.3). Each comparator carries a different scope qualifier; we report the comparison honestly with the qualifier rather than headlining a single ratio. 

5.2.1 Within-method comparator (single-specialist serial estimate) The validation cam-paign began with twenty-six axioms whose direct TLAPS discharge had been classified ATTEMPT-DEFERRED, NEGATIVE_RESULT, or open. The campaign’s own initial single-specialist sequen-tial estimate was five to seven person-months for the twenty-six axiom census. The campaign’s ac-tual wallclock under the dispatch protocol was seventeen active hours of single-session work, yielding an approximate fifty-to-sixty-fold reduction against the same campaign’s serial estimate. This is the cleanest benchmark in the table on the scope axis because it holds the proof scope, the proof-shape distribution, the operator’s expertise level, and the underlying tooling constant. The variable being measured is purely the parallel-dispatch architecture against the single-specialist serial alternative. We note the methodological limitation that the serial estimate against which the 50–60 × ratio is measured was authored by the same team that authored the parallel campaign. The ratio should therefore be read as the team’s best-effort estimate of what a serial execution of the same campaign would have cost, not as an independent benchmark — comparator scope is constant by construction, but comparator-baseline independence is not established. We anchor the headline against the Path-A.2 intra-shape comparator of §5.2.2 ( ≈ 60 × against the team’s prior Path-A.2 28 TLAPS ghost-composition wallclock, which precedes the orchestrated methodology and is therefore not self-referential) and the IronFleet cross-precedent comparator of §5.2.3 (635 ×/453 × under three explicit scope qualifiers) to triangulate direction-of-effect across baseline-source classes. Under the comparator-hygiene template we adopt across §5.2 — ratio = X (comparator = Y; scope qualifier = Z; baseline source = author-generated | author-prior | independent-published) — §5.2.1 is ( ≈ 50– 60 ×; same-team serial estimate; same campaign; author-generated ), §5.2.2 is ( ≈ 60 ×; Path-A.2 TLAPS ghost-composition; same proof shape; author-prior ), and §5.2.3 is (635 ×/453 ×; IronFleet IronRSL person-year; cross-protocol + cross-scope + cross-rigour; independent-published ). We invite independent replication on a campaign of similar scope. 

5.2.2 Within-shape comparator (per-axiom Path-A.2 ghost composition) For each of the twenty-six axioms, the traditional remediation in the absence of the citation primitive was to extend the host TLA+ specification with new ghost variables and extend the inductive proof chain in the proof specification. Empirical estimates from sibling Raft proofs at similar structural complexity placed this remediation at thirty to forty hours of specialist time per axiom (Path-A.2 ghost composition). Under the citation primitive, the per-axiom Coq median wallclock observed in the campaign benchmark is 34.4 seconds (eight runs, eight PASS, ~1.3 GB peak RSS), with the remaining per-axiom cost dominated by the Coq port authoring time (median ≈ 30 minutes per axiom against the shared CommonLifts.v template). The empirical wallclock reduction for the cited subset is approximately three orders of magnitude per axiom on the verifier-runtime dimension , plus a roughly sixty-fold reduction on the authoring-time dimension. The combined per-axiom impact is dominated by the authoring-time term, since 34.4 seconds is negligible relative to 30 minutes. The headline per-axiom reduction is approximately 

60 × against the Path-A.2 baseline .The 34.4 s versus ≈ 30 min split also relocates the campaign-level bottleneck. Under the citation primitive the verification dimension is fast; the porting dimension (authoring the per-backend sister theorem against the shared CommonLifts.v template, the Lean Mathlib equivalent, or the Why3 / Apalache / Z3 transcription) is now the dominant per-axiom cost. This shift is significant for the future direction of AI assistance in the architecture: the next natural extension of the dispatch protocol is AI-generated candidate ports — specialist agents that, given a TLAPS apex obligation, propose a candidate Coq / Lean / Why3 / Apalache / Z3 / CBMC port that the respective kernel then checks. The kernel remains the verification authority; the agent’s contribution is in the porting layer rather than the proving layer, and the kernel-check pass / fail signal supplies a clean training feedback loop without expanding the trusted base. We discuss this direction further in section 6.4. This benchmark holds the proof shape constant (the same axiom is being discharged; only the discharge mechanism varies) but compares two structurally distinct strategies (citation versus ghost composition). The IronFleet, Verdi-Raft, and MongoRaftReconfig precedents do not report a per-axiom wallclock benchmark, so we cannot refine this comparator with cross-precedent data. 

5.2.3 Cross-precedent comparator (IronFleet IronRSL person-year baseline) The cross-precedent comparator compares the validation campaign’s wallclock to the published person-year costs of the comparator precedents. We report the IronFleet ratio as illustrative because Iron-Fleet is the most-cited deductive-liveness precedent and reports its person-year cost in the primary publication. IronFleet’s IronRSL Paxos verification is reported as 3.7 person-years of effort. Under the conven-29 tional 8-hour-day, 365-day-year work-hour translation, this is 3.7 × 365 × 8 = 10,804 person-hours. Against the campaign’s 17 active hours, the ratio is approximately 635 ×. Under a 40-hour-week, 52-week-year translation (3.7 × 52 × 40 = 7,696 person-hours), the ratio is approximately 453 ×.We report this comparison with three explicit scope qualifiers: 1. Cross-protocol : IronFleet verifies Paxos / IronRSL; the campaign verifies Raft. The proof-shape distributions are similar (consensus protocols share the safety / liveness / reconfigura-tion / log-management structure) but not identical. 2. Cross-scope : IronFleet’s IronRSL verification includes verified extraction to executable C# with a soundness theorem connecting the Dafny proof to the running binary. The campaign closes the implementation-specification gap via runtime SpecBridge::Invariants hooks rather than verified extraction. The trusted-base profile differs: IronFleet accepts a smaller trusted base (an OCaml-style shim and a .NET runtime); the campaign accepts a larger trusted base (the JVM, the unit test suite, the SpecBridge runtime). 3. Cross-rigour : IronFleet’s PTL-deductive liveness for IronRSL is a first mechanically-checked single-stack deductive liveness proof. The campaign achieves functional IronFleet-parity (ev-ery liveness property mechanically discharged) but routes the temporal-composition apex through a Coq cross-axis bridge for four of five properties and through a PRISM probabilistic discharge for the fifth. The honest framing is that the 635 × / 453 × figure is a cross-precedent ratio under the three stated scope qualifiers , not a like-for-like speedup. It illustrates the headroom the method’s composition-ality opens; it does not assert that the same effort would have been required if IronFleet had targeted Mercury’s exact scope, on Mercury’s exact tooling, with Mercury’s exact trusted base. Abstract-adjacent references to this comparator should always carry the scope-qualifier suffix so a skim-reader cannot extract the headline number without the qualifiers (M1 in the §5.2 comparator-hygiene template). 10 100 1,000 10,000 

Person-hours (log scale; 40 h/week × 52 weeks/year translation) 

> IronFleet IronRSL
> (SOSP 2015)
> Verdi-Raft
> (PLDI 2015 / CPP 2016)
> MongoRaftReconfig
> (CPP 2022)
> Mercury validation
> (this method, 2026)

7,696 h 

4,160 h 

693 h 

17 h 

> Verified extraction · PTL-deductive liveness · smaller TCB · Paxos
> Verified extraction · safety only · reconfig + compaction excluded
> TLAPS deductive · safety only · reconfig scope only
> Citation + dispatch · full Raft scope · runtime SpecBridge in lieu of extraction

Wallclock comparison across consensus-verification campaigns 

> Precedent campaigns
> Present method
> Bars are scope-qualified. The headline ratio (≈ 450× IronFleet) is an order-of-magnitude indicator of the
> headroom the composition of cross-backend citation, cross-axis convergence, and AI-orchestrated dispatch
> opens — not a per-axiom benchmark with constant scope and rigour.

30 Figure 7. Wallclock comparison across consensus-verification campaigns. Bars are scope-qualified — IronFleet includes verified extraction with PTL-deductive liveness on a smaller trusted base (Multi-Paxos, not Raft); Verdi-Raft includes verified extraction but excludes reconfiguration, log compaction, and linearizable client reads; MongoRaftReconfig is TLAPS-deductive safety-only on the reconfiguration scope; the present method achieves full Raft algorithmic scope (joint consensus, leadership transfer, log compaction, linearizable client reads, dynamic reconfiguration) on a larger trusted base (JVM + unit tests + SpecBridge runtime). Person-hours are computed under the conservative 40 h/week × 52 weeks/year translation; an 8 h/day × 365 day/year translation would scale the precedent bars upward by ≈ 1.4 ×. The comparison is best read as an order-of-magnitude indicator of the headroom the composition of cross-backend citation, cross-axis convergence, and AI-orchestrated dispatch opens, not as a per-axiom benchmark with constant scope and rigour. 

5.2.4 Per-backend wallclock breakdown Per-backend median wallclocks observed in the cam-paign benchmark on the apex-axiom subset are summarised in Table 2. Backend Runs PASS FAIL Median (s) Peak RSS (MB) Coq 8 8 0 34.4 1275 Apalache 3 0 3 118.3 1473 TLC 5 0 5 205.1 128 PRISM 13 1 12 148.1 1473 

Table 2. Per-axiom × per-backend wallclock benchmark (apex set). Coq is the empirical winner on the cited apex shape: 8/8 PASS, 34.4s median, ~1.3 GB peak RSS. The Apalache failures stem from <dynamic> integer-range encoding rejections requiring per-VARIABLE Snowcat type annotations matching constant bounds. The PRISM 12 FAILs were initially classified as model-bugs and reclassified post hoc as TIER-B model-abstraction bugs after root-cause analysis. The TLC tasks failed to launch in this benchmark window due to concurrent Gradle script edits during the run; the TLC verdicts in the verdict matrix (PASS@bound) remain authoritative. 

31 Coq Apalache PRISM TLC 

> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> Median wallclock (seconds)
> 34.4 s
> 118.3 s
> 148.1 s
> 205.1 s
> 8/8
> (100% PASS)
> 0/3
> (0% PASS)
> 1/13
> (8% PASS)
> 0/5
> (0% PASS)

Per-backend median wallclock and PASS rate on the cited apex axiom cohort 

> Reliability on this cohort
> ≥ 95% PASS rate
> 1–50% PASS rate
> 0% PASS rate
> launch failure (not backend-class)
> Lower wallclock + higher PASS rate together justify the dispatch heuristic of §5.2.4: Coq first for cited apex shapes.
> The TLC launch failures stem from concurrent build-script edits during the benchmark; TLC verdicts in the verdict matrix
> (PASS@bound) are authoritative.

Figure 8. Per-backend median wallclock and PASS rate on the cited apex axiom cohort. Bar height encodes median wallclock (lower is better); fill colour encodes PASS rate on this cohort (teal = ≥

95% PASS; orange = 1–50%; red = 0%); the hatched TLC bar flags the launch-failure caveat noted in Table 2’s caption (the failures stem from concurrent Gradle script edits during the benchmark window, not from backend incapacity; the TLC verdicts in the verdict matrix at PASS@bound remain authoritative). The chart’s joint-dominance pattern — Coq is simultaneously the fastest backend and the only one with a high PASS rate on this cohort — supplies the visual support for the dispatch heuristic stated below. 

The dispatch heuristic that emerges from the per-backend breakdown is straightforward: Coq first for cited apex shapes; PRISM first for probabilistic-liveness shapes; Apalache first for bounded-symbolic shapes with proper Snowcat annotations; standalone Z3 first for hand-encoded apex obligations whose deductive content fits in <500 lines of bounded-quantifier SMT-LIB v2. 

5.2.5 Cross-system algorithmic-scope comparison Table 3 summarises the cross-system algorithmic-scope comparison against the verified-Raft precedents. The table records, per dimen-sion, whether the precedent verifies that dimension, with an asterisk for partial coverage and a dash for not applicable. Dimension IronFleet ’15 Verdi-Raft ’15/16 MongoRecfg ’22 Mercury (this) Algorithm Multi-Paxos / IronRSL Raft Raft Raft Dynamic reconfig. (joint consensus) Yes No (excluded) Yes (single-server reconfig.) Yes (joint consensus) Leadership transfer n/a No (excluded) n/a Yes Log compaction Yes No (excluded) n/a Yes Linearizable client n/a partial n/a Yes 32 Dimension IronFleet ’15 Verdi-Raft ’15/16 MongoRecfg ’22 Mercury (this) Liveness mechanically verified Yes (deductive PTL) No No (safety-only) Yes (4 dual-ded. + 1 PRISM) Verified extraction Yes (Dafny →

C#) Yes (Coq →

OCaml) No No (SpecBridge runtime) Cross-backend verification No (Z3 only) No (Coq only) No (TLAPS only) Yes (cross-axis matrix) Production deployment No No (research 

vard )Indirect (MongoDB) Yes (Bullish HFT) Reported person-cost 3.7 person-years ≈ 2 person-years ≈ 4person-months 

≈ 17 active hours (single session) 

Table 3. Cross-system algorithmic-scope comparison. The Mercury validation column reports the present method’s coverage on the Raft validation subsystem; the financial-arithmetic invariant layer (section 4.3) is additional coverage no precedent reports. 

The headline observation from Table 3 is that the method is the only one in the table that combines (i) multi-backend verification, (ii) full Raft algorithmic scope (joint consensus, leadership transfer, log compaction, linearizable client reads), and (iii) production deployment, at one to two orders of magnitude lower per-axiom wallclock than the precedent baselines. The trade-off paid for the lower wallclock is the larger trusted base relative to verified-extraction precedents (section 5.2.3). 

5.3 Cross-axis convergence empirics 

The cross-axis convergence matrix records, per cited apex axiom, which independent verification axes confirm the discharge. Of the eighteen cited apex axioms in the present matrix, all eighteen achieve PROVED on the Coq axis, all eighteen achieve PROVED on the Lean axis, ten of eighteen achieve PASS@bound on TLC when the axiom property is wired as an INVARIANT in a TLC configuration file, seven of eighteen have wired PRISM models with execution-sweep PASS verdicts, seven of eighteen have associated runtime SpecBridge::Invariants assertions in production code paths, fourteen of eighteen are gated by dual-citation (Coq + Lean kernel agreement), and three of eighteen are gated by triple-citation (Coq + Lean + Apalache symbolic agreement at a fixed length bound). Convergence Count Description 3-axis 4 Three independent axes confirm 4-axis 5 Four independent axes confirm 5-axis 5 Five independent axes confirm 6-axis 3 Six independent axes confirm 8-axis 1 Eight independent axes confirm (gold-standard exemplar) 

Total 18 

Table 4. Per-axiom convergence histogram. Minimum convergence is three axes; maximum is eight axes; mean is approximately 4.6 axes per cited axiom. 

33 5.4 Production-bug-finding empirics 

The CBMC integration as a verification axis surfaced three real production bugs in Mercury’s FFM-wrapped native libraries on the first production-side dispatch: 1. The JSON arena allocator unsigned-arithmetic wraparound; 2. The HTTP-parser branchless processed-bytes computation triggering C11 §6.5.6/9 undefined behaviour; 3. The JSON mutation API allocator vtable contract violation. None of these bugs had been observed by valgrind, AddressSanitizer, UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer, or the upstream library fuzz corpora. Regression tests for each bug are wired to the corresponding CBMC harness and re-run on every CBMC verification invocation. The Themis side surfaced the production-impact case study reported in section 4.3 (the perp-funding 10 12 over-charge bug). These four production bugs constitute the validation campaign’s bug-finding empirics; we report them to demonstrate that the method’s cross-axis chorus is not just epistemic ornamentation but discovers real defects the precedent verification toolchains do not. 

5.5 Honest negative results 

Three negative results from the validation campaign are reported here for honesty rather than as defects. The methodology is honest only if the disclosure surfaces what the cross-axis exploration found. 

Apalache symbolic refutation of LogPositionTermMatchAxiom . An Apalache symbolic exploration of the parent specification’s reachable-state graph at length six produced a six-step counter-example to the unconditional form of LogPositionTermMatchAxiom . Investigation revealed that the cited Coq theorem log_matching_local_axiom proves a local pair-property restricted to log-pairs shar-ing a common ancestor, while the original TLA+ theorem statement made a global claim across all node pairs including pairs without a common ancestor. The cited Coq theorem was consequently strictly weaker than the original TLA+ theorem. We responded by hypothesis-strengthening the TLA+ theorem statement to add an explicit []All-PairsShareCommonAncestor premise, which honestly reflects the scope at which the Coq port discharges. The strengthened TLA+ theorem is now mechanically verified at the matched-scope; downstream consumers requiring the unconditional form must separately discharge the premise. This trajectory exemplifies the methodology working as designed. Cross-axis exploration caught what single-backend verification would have left invisible, and the response was to tighten the cited claim rather than coerce the gap closed. 

PRISM five-FAIL cluster reclassified as TIER-B model bugs . The PRISM probabilistic axis returned five FAIL verdicts on cited apex axioms in an early benchmark window. Root-cause analysis reclassi-fied these post hoc as TIER-B model-abstraction bugs (the PRISM model omitted a LogOk filter; fix landed at commit 981101d6b ). The original FAIL verdicts were artefacts of the model-abstraction step rather than genuine refutations of the cited axioms; the cross-axis convergence pattern surfaced the modelling bug by virtue of the disagreement against the deductive axes’ PROVED verdicts. 

Apalache <dynamic> integer-range encoding limit . Three SMT-symbolic verifications failed under Apalache’s <dynamic> integer-range encoding rejection (a known Apalache limitation that requires per-VARIABLE Snowcat type annotations matching constant bounds). We highlight that this is 34 a structural limitation of bounded symbolic model checking on state spaces involving unbounded integers, not an idiosyncratic Apalache quirk: any SMT-backed BMC that encodes the transition relation as a quantifier-free formula must bound the integer domain at encoding time, and integer recurrences over unbounded domains break that bound. The coordinator cross-routed these obli-gations to Coq’s Fixpoint recursive operators (which represent the recurrence inductively at the proof-state level rather than reifying it as an SMT formula), and the Coq port closed them within the per-axiom Coq median wallclock. The shape-based dispatch heuristic that emerges — recursive operators over unbounded integer domains → deductive Fixpoint, not bounded SMT — generalises to any BMC backend in the roster (Apalache, CBMC, the SMT-LIB v2 Z3 axis), and is encoded as part of the coordinator’s static signal table (section 3.3.1). 

6. Discussion 

6.1 Threats to validity 

The verification posture rests on five trusted bases: the kernels of TLAPS, Coq, Lean 4, and Why3; the SMT solvers in the TLAPS cascade and the standalone Z3 axis; the bounded model checkers Apalache and CBMC; the JVM, the SpecMonitorProcessor annotation processor, and the runtime 

SpecHookRegistry machinery; and the build system that orchestrates the citation primitive’s drift-resistance properties. A soundness bug in any single kernel invalidates the verification claim only for axioms wired against that kernel exclusively; the dual- and triple-citation gates partition the trust regime so that single-kernel regressions are contained. The cross-axis convergence matrix’s epistemic value depends on the assumption that multiple ker-nel agreement on a theorem statement implies semantic correctness of the underlying claim. This assumption is empirically defensible — disagreements have been observed and have served the methodology as it is designed (the LogPositionTermMatchAxiom open question discussed in section 5.5 is the canonical example) — but is not a soundness theorem. What the architecture does deliver is an operational kernel-agreement gate under named correspondence certificates : a build-system-enforced invariant that the named cited external theorem closes under each wired kernel’s Print Assumptions -class directive on every commit, with the per-citation human-authored correspon-dence certificate (section 3.1.4) the explicit residual the cross-axis chorus partially checks empirically but does not yet mechanically prove. This is the positive claim the abstract makes and that section 6.3 names as the principal open problem to close. The strength of the convergence signal scales with paradigm disjointness: the strongest disagreement signal comes from backends with maximally orthogonal verification paradigms (deductive proof versus bounded symbolic model checking versus probabilistic model checking versus production-code linearizability checking), since their kernel-bug histories and failure modes are largely uncorrelated. Within-paradigm variants (Coq versus Lean, both CIC; TLC versus Apalache, both BMC; multiple SMT solvers in the TLAPS cascade) carry weaker orthogonality — Coq and Lean share substantial CIC ancestry; multiple BMCs share the bounded-encoding family of failure modes. Table 4’s convergence histogram implicitly captures this hierarchy (the gold-standard LogMatchingLocalAxiom 8-axis row spans four distinct paradigms), but we state it explicitly here because the epistemic argument for the convergence matrix depends on it. The SpecBridge::Invariants runtime hooks rest on two distinct assumptions, which we separate because the prior version of the architecture conflated them. First , the InvariantTranslator 

correctly translates the named TLA+ invariant expressions into the generated Java verifier meth-ods. The translation is mechanised at compile time by the SpecMonitorProcessor (section 4.4), 35 is unit-tested via InvariantTranslatorTest , and is keyed on a spec-hash that forces regeneration whenever a cited .tla or .cfg changes. Second , the translator’s translation rules themselves are correct — i.e., the TLA+ → Java rewrite the translator implements preserves semantics. The trans-lation rules are human-authored and are not themselves mechanically verified. The architecture-level claim is therefore narrower than the previous draft asserted: the per-class assertion logic is mechanically derived from the cited spec rather than hand-coded per class, but the derivation rules themselves remain in the trust base. Mechanising the translator’s correctness (e.g., by Coq-extracting Java verifier code directly from the proved Coq invariants, bypassing the TLA+ → Java translator entirely) is named as future work in section 6.4. 

6.2 Scope of the verification claim 

The method does not claim verified extraction with a formal soundness theorem. The Coq-to-OCaml extraction pipeline that exists in the validation campaign is a mechanical translation rather than a soundness theorem bridging Coq Gallina semantics to the OCaml runtime semantics. We claim experimental Coq-to-OCaml mechanical extraction with differential-testing assurance against the production Java implementation; we do not claim Verdi-style verified extraction or IronFleet-style verified-binary equivalence. The validation campaign’s Raft assumes the crash-fault model. Byzantine fault tolerance — verified or not — is out of scope. The method does not claim that “more backends always means more trust.” The sixteen-backend roster spans deductive, bounded, symbolic, probabilistic, and runtime axes. Each axis has a specific role and a specific failure mode. Adding a backend that re-verifies what an existing backend already covers without adding axis-orthogonal coverage does not increase epistemic strength linearly. The cross-axis convergence matrix records which axes are capable for which axiom; not all sixteen backends are capable for every single obligation. 

6.3 Open problems and reservations 

The principal open problem the architecture surfaces, named here at the level of priority it merits, is the mechanisation of correspondence certificates (section 3.1.4). The citation primitive’s trust base currently includes a per-obligation human-authored claim that the cited external theorem is semantically equivalent to the TLAPS obligation it discharges. The architecture’s cross-axis convergence matrix partially checks this claim empirically — as the LogPositionTermMatchAxiom 

global-versus-local scope divergence of section 5.5 illustrates, a sufficiently disjoint axis can refute a correspondence mismatch by exhibiting a counter-example in the stronger claim that the weaker cited theorem cannot rule out. But empirical cross-axis checking is not a proof of correspondence; it is a defense-in-depth that catches the correspondence mismatches the wired axes happen to be sensitive to. The next significant architectural advance closing a trust gap (rather than a wallclock or scope gap) is to mechanise the correspondence certificate itself — to produce, per citation, a kernel-checked proof that the cited external theorem is a re-statement of the TLAPS obligation under a fixed translation. Candidate approaches include shallow embedding of TLA semantics in the target kernel (as Bythos does for Coq), schema-based translation rules whose correctness is itself proved once and reused, and operator-authored equivalence theorems checked by a meta-kernel. Section 6.4 names this as future work item one. Five further reservations on the architecture merit explicit acknowledgement. 36 The verification posture is tractable at the cost of a stronger trusted base than verified-extraction precedents accept. The validation campaign accepts the JVM, the unit test suite, the SpecMonitor-Processor , and the SpecHookRegistry runtime as trusted; verified-extraction precedents (Verdi, IronFleet) accept smaller trusted bases. The dispatch protocol’s wallclock-compression claims rest on the availability of abundant compute and the per-specialist economics of an autonomous agent. Both prerequisites are properties of the present compute environment rather than fundamental properties of the architecture; the claims should be expected to evolve as the underlying compute economics evolve. The annotation-layer cross-axis chorus is empirical defense-in-depth, not a soundness theorem. The honest interpretation of the chorus is that any single-axis regression surfaces as a build-time disagree-ment before it can propagate; the chorus does not establish that the cited theorem is unfalsifiable in any logical sense. The dual- and triple-kernel agreement gates assume kernel independence in the strong sense (disjoint trusted bases). The assumption is defensible in the present configuration (Coq’s CIC and Lean 4’s CIC variant share substantial conceptual ancestry but are independent implementations with disjoint kernel bug histories) but should not be confused with mathematical independence of the proof shapes — see also the maximally-disjoint-paradigm discussion of section 6.1. The cross-subsystem demonstration generalises across two proof-shape classes (consensus and financial-arithmetic). Extending to a third class (cryptographic-protocol verification, smart-contract VM correctness, or distributed-database transaction protocol) would strengthen the gen-eralisability claim; the present claim is bounded to the two demonstrated classes. 

6.4 Future work 

Eight future-work directions follow from the present verification posture. The first two close trust gaps; the remaining six close wallclock, scope, or generalisability gaps. 

First, mechanised correspondence certificates (the open problem of section 6.3). The principal trust-gap closure on the architecture’s path is to mechanically prove, per citation, that the cited external theorem is a re-statement of the TLAPS obligation under a fixed translation — replacing the per-citation human-authored correspondence certificate with a kernel-checked equivalence proof. Candidate approaches include shallow TLA semantic embeddings in target kernels (Bythos-style, but per-kernel-target rather than Coq-only), schema-based translation rules whose correctness is proved once and reused across instances, and a meta-kernel that checks operator-authored equiva-lence theorems written in a small dependently-typed core. The trade-off space is between investment cost (embeddings are expensive but global; per-citation equivalence theorems are cheap but local) and reuse (embedded TLA pays back across the whole campaign; per-citation theorems do not). Any of these closes the residual gap that the cross-axis convergence matrix currently checks only empirically. 

Second, end-to-end-mechanised TLA+ → Java codegen for the SpecBridge layer (the §6.1 second-correspondence-problem closure). The SpecMonitorProcessor currently translates cited TLA+ invariants to generated Java verifiers via the human-authored InvariantTranslator rules. Two paths close the residual translator-rules trust gap. The first is to extract Java verifier code di-rectly from the proved Coq invariants (via Coq’s extraction mechanism, suitably retargeted to Java rather than OCaml), bypassing the TLA+ → Java translator entirely. The second is to retain the translator but mechanically prove the translator’s rules against a formal semantics of 37 the relevant TLA+ invariant fragment and the corresponding Java assertion fragment, producing a one-time soundness theorem that all generated verifiers transitively inherit. Either path closes the second correspondence problem (TLA+ ↔ Java production code), mirroring item 1 above which closes the first correspondence problem (TLA+ ↔ external proof system). 

Third, AI-generated candidate ports as a campaign-throughput extension of the dispatch protocol (the porting-bottleneck closure named in section 5.2.2). With per-axiom kernel-verification wallclock now at 34.4 s median Coq and per-axiom porting wallclock at ≈ 30 min, the next throughput lever is at the porting layer rather than the verification layer. A specialist agent receives a TLAPS apex obligation and proposes a candidate Coq / Lean / Why3 / Apalache / Z3 / CBMC port; the respective kernel then checks the port and emits PASS / FAIL. The kernel remains the verification authority — no extension of the trusted base — and the kernel-check signal supplies a clean training feedback loop. This is the natural extension of the architecture’s existing dispatch protocol from per-obligation backend routing to per-obligation port-candidate generation. 

Fourth, single-stack pure-TLAPS-PTL-deductive liveness for all five canonical Raft liveness prop-erties. The present closure achieves functional IronFleet-parity via cross-axis Coq-bridge for the temporal-composition apex blockers; a tlapm PTL backend extension or a TLAPS-native restate-ment of the PTL composition lemma would close the structural gap. This is nice-to-have rather than trust-gap-closing — the present dual-stack closure is already kernel-checked under TLAPS plus Coq — but it would reduce the architecture’s surface area on the temporal-logic axis. 

Fifth, compositional logic for the cross-specification refactor that the present specification tree implements informally would benefit from a Disel-style frame rule. 

Sixth, a Mathlib-grade arithmetic library for fixed-point types would reduce the per-axis port au-thoring time on the numeric-canonical chorus, complementing the AI-candidate-port direction of item 3. 

Seventh, dual-axis Coq-plus-Lean re-proof of every cited axiom (closing the four obligations not yet at dual-citation gate status) would extend the cross-axis chorus to full coverage on the cited apex set. Eighth, extending the cross-subsystem demonstration to a third proof-shape class (cryptographic-protocol, smart-contract VM, or distributed-database transaction protocol) would strengthen the generalisability claim from “applies across two proof-shape classes” to “applies across the proof-shape-class spectrum.” 

7. Conclusion 

We proposed a federated architecture for production formal verification and validated it on a hetero-geneous production substrate. The architecture treats a verification campaign as a polyglot proof system: TLA+ expresses system-level obligations, specialist backends discharge obligations suited to their proof shape, CI-enforced citation gates preserve drift-resistance across the heterogeneous trust base, and AI agents coordinate parallel proof discovery without entering the trusted computing base. The contribution is not a faster way to run a single proof assistant — it is an orchestration layer around heterogeneous proof systems that makes a previously serialised, single-backend, single-specialist activity scale to a multi-backend, multi-specialist, parallel-discharge regime. The architecture has three primary mechanisms — cross-backend citation, cross-axis convergence, and AI-orchestrated mass-parallel dispatch — plus the algorithmic-versus-annotation distinction (section 3.4). Together they decouple four structural constraints that have shaped the precedent verified-systems literature: backend monoculture, excluded algorithmic scope, per-axiom serialisa-38 tion, and single-operator serialisation of proof campaigns. The architecture also surfaces an open problem at the level of the trust base — the mechanisation of correspondence certificates — which we name explicitly in section 6.3 as the principal architectural advance that should follow. We validated the architecture on two production subsystems within the Mercury high-frequency-trading platform: a Raft consensus subsystem with full algorithmic scope (joint consensus, leader-ship transfer, log compaction, linearizable client reads, dynamic reconfiguration) and a financial-arithmetic invariant layer (balance accounting, AMM curve invariants, isolated-margin family, lock-tracking settlement). The validation campaign closed a 26-axiom Raft census in seventeen single-session active hours, an empirical ≈ 60 × per-axiom reduction against the team’s prior Path-A.2 TLAPS ghost-composition baseline at intra-shape scope (§5.2.2; author-prior ); a within-method comparator (§5.2.1; author-generated ) and a cross-precedent IronFleet comparator under three explicit scope qualifiers (§5.2.3; independent-published ) report consistent direction-of-effect (§5.2 comparator-hygiene template). The campaign brought five numeric canonicals to six-axis chorus discharge, and surfaced four real production bugs the precedent toolchains had not observed — including a perp-funding 10 12 over-charge bug that single-backend specification campaigns are structurally blind to. The architecture’s contribution is compositional in two senses. The three mechanisms compose to make a multi-backend verification campaign tractable for a single small team on a production codebase (section 5.2); and the architecture itself composes against the recurring compromises of the precedent literature (section 2.5) by replacing each compromise with a structural mechanism rather than additional engineering effort within a single-backend posture. We invite the verification community to adopt the federated verification architecture — the citation primitive, the cross-axis convergence matrix, and the AI-orchestrated dispatch protocol — on their own targets. The dispatch agents, the citation primitive’s build-system DSL, the cross-axis matrix tooling, and the 

SpecMonitorProcessor annotation processor are open source. 

8. Acknowledgements 

The validation campaign on Mercury benefited from the production deployment context and the prior verification work that established the cited apex axiom set. The author thanks the Bullish en-gineering team for the production deployment substrate that made the validation possible, and the Mercury verification engineering team for the prior baseline against which the campaign measured. The author thanks the maintainers of TLAPS, Coq, Lean 4, Mathlib, Why3, Apalache, PRISM, CBMC, and Lincheck for the open-source verification infrastructure on which the method depends. The author thanks Anthropic’s Claude Code agent platform (Anthropic 2025) for the autonomous-specialist dispatch substrate; the dispatch protocol described in section 3.3 is implemented as specialist agents on that platform. 

Appendix A. Reproducibility recipe 

Every numerical and architectural claim in this paper is associated with a recipe that produces the claimed value at the published reproducibility tag of the source repository. The recipe takes the form of a single command sequence: clone the repository at the published tag; provision all sixteen backends via the Gradle install task (typical wallclock two to five minutes on a cold cache); run the relevant per-backend smoke task to confirm host campaign-readiness; invoke the per-claim verification recipes catalogued in the per-claim grep table. The per-claim grep table is bundled with the published artefact at the reproducibility tag. Each 39 entry has the form (claim → command → expected value), with the command being a grep -and-count or build-task invocation that produces the claimed value when run against the published tag. Readers running on a later HEAD will observe the direction of subsequent campaign work (typically additional cross-axis convergence) but the published-tag values remain reproducible at the published-tag commit. The verification-stack provisioning is auto-soft-fail-tolerant: a single backend’s download URL be-coming unreachable degrades the install task to skip that backend rather than failing the whole roster. Smoke-test reports surface the missing backend explicitly; the operator can re-run the affected download task once connectivity is restored. The smoke task is a binary-availability check (each backend’s binary is invoked with a --version -class probe) rather than a per-specification proof discharge; per-specification proof discharge requires the per-backend per-specification verifi-cation task family. 

Appendix B. Per-axiom convergence table 

The per-axiom × per-axis verdict matrix is bundled with the published artefact at the reproducibil-ity tag. Each row is a cited apex axiom; each column is one of the ten effective verification axes (TLC, Coq, Lean 4, Why3, PRISM, Apalache, Z3-standalone, Runtime SpecBridge, Dual-kernel agreement, Triple-kernel agreement); each cell records the per-axis verdict (PROVED, REFUTED, NOT_APPLICABLE, etc.). The histogram of section 5.3 is derived from this matrix; the matrix is auto-regenerated from the build artefacts. 

9. References 

Akkoorath, Deepthi Devaki, Alejandro Z. Tomsic, Manuel Bravo, et al. 2016. “Cure: Strong Semantics Meets High Availability and Low Latency.” Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS ’16) , 405–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICDCS.2016.98. Anthropic. 2025. Claude Code: Agentic Coding in the Terminal . https://www.anthropic.com/cl aude-code. Barbosa, Haniel, Clark Barrett, Martin Brain, et al. 2022. “cvc5: A Versatile and Industrial-Strength SMT Solver.” Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS ’22) , 415–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99524-9_24. Barrett, Clark, Christopher L. Conway, Morgan Deters, et al. 2011. “CVC4.” Computer Aided Verification (CAV ’11) , 171–77. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-22110-1_14. Bhargavan, Karthikeyan, Barry Bond, Antoine Delignat-Lavaud, et al. 2017. “Everest: Towards a Verified, Drop-in Replacement of HTTPS.” Summit on Advances in Programming Languages (SNAPL ’17) .Bobot, François, Jean-Christophe Filliâtre, Claude Marché, and Andrei Paskevich. 2011. “Why3: Shepherd Your Herd of Provers.” Boogie 2011: First International Workshop on Intermediate Verification Languages , 53–64. Bonichon, Richard, David Delahaye, and Damien Doligez. 2007. “Zenon: An Extensible Automated 40 Theorem Prover Producing Checkable Proofs.” Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Reasoning (LPAR ’07) , 151–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-75560-9_13. Bouton, Thomas, Diego Caminha B. de Oliveira, David Déharbe, and Pascal Fontaine. 2009. “veriT: An Open, Trustable and Efficient SMT-Solver.” Automated Deduction (CADE-22) , 151– 56. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02959-2_12. Carr, Harold, Christopher Jenkins, Mark Moir, Victor Cacciari Miraldo, and Lisandra Silva. 2022. “Towards Formal Verification of HotStuff-Based Byzantine Fault Tolerant Consensus in Agda.” 

Proceedings of the 14th NASA Formal Methods Symposium (NFM ’22) . https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2203.14711. Chand, Saksham, Yanhong A. Liu, and Scott D. Stoller. 2016. Formal Verification of Multi-Paxos for Distributed Consensus . arXiv:1606.01387. https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.01387. Chaudhuri, Kaustuv, Damien Doligez, Leslie Lamport, and Stephan Merz. 2010. “The TLA+ Proof System: Building a Heterogeneous Verification Platform.” Theoretical Aspects of Computing – ICTAC 2010 , 44–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-14808-8_3. Clarke, Edmund, Daniel Kroening, and Flavio Lerda. 2004. “A Tool for Checking ANSI-C Pro-grams.” Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS ’04) ,168–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-24730-2_15. Cousineau, Denis, Damien Doligez, Leslie Lamport, Stephan Merz, Daniel Ricketts, and Hernán Vanzetto. 2012. “TLA+ Proofs.” FM 2012: Formal Methods , 147–54. https://doi.org/10.100 7/978-3-642-32759-9_14. Cruanes, Simon, and the Zipperposition contributors. 2021. Zipperposition: A Higher-Order Superposition Theorem Prover . Https://github.com/sneeuwballen/zipperposition. Davis, Aaron et al. 2026. “LeaseGuard: A Verified Raft Leader-Lease Protocol with Read-Your-Writes Correctness.” Proceedings of the 2026 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data . https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.15659. Dean, Jeffrey, and Luiz André Barroso. 2013. “The Tail at Scale.” Communications of the ACM 

56 (2): 74–80. https://doi.org/10.1145/2408776.2408794. Delahaye, Mickael, Nikolai Kosmatov, and Julien Signoles. 2013. “Common Specification Language for Static and Dynamic Analysis of C Programs.” Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Sympo-sium on Applied Computing (SAC ’13) , 1230–35. https://doi.org/10.1145/2480362.2480593. Di Napoli, Alfredo, Ranjit Jhala, Andres Löh, and Niki Vazou. 2020. “Liquid Haskell: As a GHC Plugin.” Haskell Implementors’ Workshop (HIW 2020), Co-Located with ICFP 2020 .https://icfp20.sigplan.org/details/hiw-2020-papers/1/Liquid-Haskell-as-a-GHC-Plugin. Du, Yilun, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. 2023. Im-proving Factuality and Reasoning in Language Models Through Multiagent Debate . https: //arxiv.org/abs/2305.14325. 41 Filliâtre, Jean-Christophe, and Andrei Paskevich. 2013. “Why3 — Where Programs Meet Provers.” 

Programming Languages and Systems (ESOP ’13) , 125–28. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-37036-6_8. Hackett, Finn, Joshua Rowe, and Markus A. Kuppe. 2022. Understanding Inconsistency in Azure Cosmos DB with TLA+ . arXiv:2210.13661. https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13661. Hawblitzel, Chris, Jon Howell, Manos Kapritsos, et al. 2015. “IronFleet: Proving Practical Dis-tributed Systems Correct.” Proceedings of the 25th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’15) (Monterey, CA, USA), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/2815400.2815428. Hawblitzel, Chris, Jon Howell, Manos Kapritsos, et al. 2017. “IronFleet: Proving Safety and Liveness of Practical Distributed Systems.” Communications of the ACM 60 (7): 83–92. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3068608. Hoare, C. A. R. 2003. “The Verifying Compiler: A Grand Challenge for Computing Research.” 

Journal of the ACM 50 (1): 63–69. https://doi.org/10.1145/602382.602403. Howard, Heidi, Markus A. Kuppe, Edward Ashton, Amaury Chamayou, and Natacha Crooks. 2025. “Smart Casual Verification of CCF.” Proceedings of the 22nd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’25) . https://www.usenix.org/system/files/nsdi25-howard.pdf. Klein, Gerwin, Kevin Elphinstone, Gernot Heiser, et al. 2009. “seL4: Formal Verification of an OS Kernel.” Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGOPS Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’09) , 207–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/1629575.1629596. Konnov, Igor, Jure Kukovec, and Thanh-Hai Tran. 2019. “TLA+ Model Checking Made Symbolic.” 

Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (PACMPL), OOPSLA ’19 3: 1–30. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3360549. Kosmatov, Nikolai, Guillaume Petiot, and Julien Signoles. 2013. “An Optimized Memory Monitor-ing for Runtime Assertion Checking of C Programs.” Runtime Verification (RV 2013) , 167–82. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40787-1_10. Koval, Nikita, Alexander Fedorov, Maria Sokolova, Dmitry Tsitelov, and Dan Alistarh. 2023. “Lincheck: A Practical Framework for Testing Concurrent Data Structures on JVM.” Computer Aided Verification (CAV ’23) .Krogh-Jespersen, Morten, Amin Timany, Marit Edna Ohlenbusch, Simon Oddershede Gregersen, and Lars Birkedal. 2020. “Aneris: A Mechanised Logic for Modular Reasoning about Dis-tributed Systems.” Proceedings of the 29th European Symposium on Programming (ESOP ’20) ,336–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-44914-8_13. Kwiatkowska, Marta, Gethin Norman, and David Parker. 2002. “PRISM: Probabilistic Symbolic Model Checker.” Computer Performance Evaluation: Modelling Techniques and Tools (TOOLS ’02) , 200–204. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-46029-2_13. 42 Kwiatkowska, Marta, Gethin Norman, and David Parker. 2011. “PRISM 4.0: Verification of Probabilistic Real-Time Systems.” Computer Aided Verification (CAV ’11) , 585–91. https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-22110-1_47. Lamport, Leslie. 1994. “The Temporal Logic of Actions.” ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 16 (3): 872–923. https://doi.org/10.1145/177492.177726. Lamport, Leslie. 2002. Specifying Systems: The TLA+ Language and Tools for Hardware and Software Engineers . Addison-Wesley. Lattuada, Andrea, Travis Hance, Jay Bosamiya, et al. 2024. “Verus: A Practical Foundation for Systems Verification.” Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGOPS Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP ’24) . https://doi.org/10.1145/3694715.3695952. Leroy, Xavier. 2006. “Formal Certification of a Compiler Back-End or: Programming a Compiler with a Proof Assistant.” Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL ’06) , 42–54. https://doi.org/10.1145/1111037.11 11042. Lesani, Mohsen, Christian J. Bell, and Adam Chlipala. 2016. “Chapar: Certified Causally Consis-tent Distributed Key-Value Stores.” Proceedings of the 43rd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Sympo-sium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL ’16) , 357–70. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 2837614.2837622. Lightman, Hunter, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, et al. 2023. Let’s Verify Step by Step . https: //arxiv.org/abs/2305.20050. Madaan, Aman, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, et al. 2023. Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback . https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17651. Moura, Leonardo de, and Nikolaj Bjørner. 2008. “Z3: An Efficient SMT Solver.” Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS ’08) , 337–40. https://doi.or g/10.1007/978-3-540-78800-3_24. Moura, Leonardo de, and Sebastian Ullrich. 2021. “The Lean 4 Theorem Prover and Programming Language.” Automated Deduction – CADE 28 , 625–35. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79876-5_37. Newcombe, Chris, Tim Rath, Fan Zhang, Bogdan Munteanu, Marc Brooker, and Michael Deardeuff. 2015. “How Amazon Web Services Uses Formal Methods.” Communications of the ACM 58 (4): 66–73. https://doi.org/10.1145/2699417. Ongaro, Diego. 2014. “Consensus: Bridging Theory and Practice.” PhD thesis, Stanford University. https://web.stanford.edu/~ouster/cgi-bin/papers/OngaroPhD.pdf. Ongaro, Diego, and John Ousterhout. 2014. “In Search of an Understandable Consensus Algo-rithm.” Proceedings of the 2014 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC ’14) ,305–19. https://www.usenix.org/conference/atc14/technical-sessions/presentation/ongaro. 43 Padon, Oded, Jochen Hoenicke, Giuliano Losa, Andreas Podelski, Mooly Sagiv, and Sharon Shoham. 2018. “Reducing Liveness to Safety in First-Order Logic.” Proceedings of the ACM on Program-ming Languages (PACMPL), POPL ’18 . https://doi.org/10.1145/3158114. Padon, Oded, Giuliano Losa, Mooly Sagiv, and Sharon Shoham. 2017. “Paxos Made EPR: De-cidable Reasoning about Distributed Protocols.” Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (PACMPL), OOPSLA ’17 . https://doi.org/10.1145/3140568. Padon, Oded, James R. Wilcox, Jason R. Koenig, Kenneth L. McMillan, and Alex Aiken. 2024. “mypyvy: A Research Platform for Verification of Transition Systems in First-Order Logic.” 

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV ’24) .https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65630-9_4. Paulson, Lawrence C., and Jasmin C. Blanchette. 2010. “Three Years of Experience with Sledge-hammer, a Practical Link Between Automatic and Interactive Theorem Provers.” Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on the Implementation of Logics (IWIL ’10) , 1–11. Rahli, Vincent, Ivana Vukotić, Marcus Völp, and Paulo Esteves-Veríssimo. 2018. “Velisarios: Byzantine Fault-Tolerant Protocols Powered by Coq.” Proceedings of the 27th European Sym-posium on Programming (ESOP ’18) , 619–50. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-89884-1_22. Schultz, William, Ian Dardik, and Stavros Tripakis. 2022. “Formal Verification of a Distributed Dynamic Reconfiguration Protocol.” Proceedings of the 11th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs (CPP ’22) , 143–52. https://doi.org/10.1145/34 97775.3503688. Schultz, William, Ian Dardik, and Stavros Tripakis. 2024. Interactive Safety Verification by Induc-tive Proof Decomposition . arXiv:2404.18048. https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18048. Sergey, Ilya, James R. Wilcox, and Zachary Tatlock. 2018. “Programming and Proving with Distributed Protocols.” Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2 (POPL): 28:1–30. https://doi.org/10.1 145/3158116. Shinn, Noah, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning . https: //arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366. Song, Peiyang, Kaiyu Yang, and Anima Anandkumar. 2025. “Towards Large Language Models as Copilots for Theorem Proving in Lean.” Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Mathematical Reasoning and AI (NeuS 2025) , Proceedings of machine learning research, vol. 288. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2404.12534. Sun, Xudong, Wenjie Ma, Jiawei Tyler Gu, et al. 2024. “Anvil: Verifying Liveness of Cluster Management Controllers.” Proceedings of the 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’24) . https://www.usenix.org/system/files/osdi24-sun-xudong.pdf. Swamy, Nikhil, Cătălin Hriţcu, Chantal Keller, et al. 2016. “Dependent Types and Multi-Monadic 44 Effects in F ⋆.” Proceedings of the 43rd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Prin-ciples of Programming Languages (POPL ’16) , 256–70. https://doi.org/10.1145/2837614.2837 655. The LangChain Team. 2023. Plan-and-Execute Agents . LangChain blog. https://www.langchain. com/blog/plan-and-execute-agents. The mathlib Community. 2020. “The Lean Mathematical Library.” Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs (CPP ’20) , 367–81. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3372885.3373824. Trinh, Trieu H., Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V. Le, He He, and Thang Luong. 2024. “Solving Olympiad Geometry Without Human Demonstrations.” Nature 625: 476–82. https://doi.org/10.1038/s4 1586-023-06747-5. Uht, Augustus K., Vijay Sindagi, and Kelley Hall. 1995. “Disjoint Eager Execution: An Optimal Form of Speculative Execution.” Proceedings of the 28th Annual International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO-28) , 313–25. https://doi.org/10.1109/MICRO.1995.476841. Vazou, Niki, Eric L. Seidel, Ranjit Jhala, Dimitrios Vytiniotis, and Simon Peyton Jones. 2014. “Re-finement Types for Haskell.” Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP ’14) , 269–82. https://doi.org/10.1145/2628136.2628161. Wallace, Steven, Brad Calder, and Dean M. Tullsen. 1998. “Threaded Multiple Path Execution.” 

Proceedings of the 25th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’98) ,238–49. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA.1998.694782. Wang, Lei, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, et al. 2023. Plan-and-Solve Prompting: Improving Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought Reasoning by Large Language Models . https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.04091. Weidenbach, Christoph, Dilyana Dimova, Arnaud Fietzke, Rohit Kumar, Martin Suda, and Patrick Wischnewski. 2009. “SPASS Version 3.5.” Automated Deduction (CADE-22) , 140–45. https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02959-2_10. Wilcox, James R., Doug Woos, Pavel Panchekha, et al. 2015. “Verdi: A Framework for Imple-menting and Formally Verifying Distributed Systems.” Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI ’15) (Portland, OR, USA), 357–68. https://doi.org/10.1145/2737924.2737958. Woos, Doug, James R. Wilcox, Steve Anton, Zachary Tatlock, Michael D. Ernst, and Thomas Anderson. 2016. “Planning for Change in a Formal Verification of the Raft Consensus Protocol.” 

Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs (CPP ’16) 

(St. Petersburg, FL, USA), 154–65. https://doi.org/10.1145/2854065.2854081. Yu, Yuan, Panagiotis Manolios, and Leslie Lamport. 1999. “Model Checking TLA+ Specifications.” 

Correct Hardware Design and Verification Methods (CHARME ’99) , 54–66. https://doi.org/10 .1007/3-540-48153-2_6. 45 Zhao, Wenchao, George Pı̂rlea, Adam Grzeszkiewicz, Seth Gilbert, and Ilya Sergey. 2024. “Bythos: Compositional Verification of Composite Byzantine Protocols.” Proceedings of the 2024 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’24) . https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3658644.3690355. 46